[Amit Varma]: I love cities. Cities represent everything that is good about our species. Humans are
[Amit Varma]: social animals. We learn and grow and prosper by interacting with each other, by trading
[Amit Varma]: to mutual benefit. Cities are an engine of human prosperity. You know, people often invoke
[Amit Varma]: the joys of rural living, of village life. But the history of humanity is a history of
[Amit Varma]: migration out of rural areas into urban spaces. We want to be part of large economic networks,
[Amit Varma]: which bring us opportunity. We want to be part of a bustling metropolis where there
[Amit Varma]: is a greater chance of our needs being fulfilled, where we can live the good life. And if you
[Amit Varma]: disagree with this, ask yourself where you're located right now. Chances are you've already
[Amit Varma]: voted with your feet. However, there is a big caveat to all of this. Cities are great
[Amit Varma]: most of the time, but not when there's a pandemic going on. It's our cities that are hardest
[Amit Varma]: hit by COVID-19 for obvious reasons. So many people so close together. How much social
[Amit Varma]: distancing can we manage? And while I have no doubt that cities will continue to thrive
[Amit Varma]: after this pandemic is behind us, the question remains, how much will COVID-19 change our
[Unknown]: cities? How much will COVID-19 change us and the way we live our lives?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Vaidahi Tandil, a scholar who works
[Amit Varma]: at the IDFC Institute in Mumbai, and has been studying cities and writing about urbanization
[Amit Varma]: for many years now. I've been thinking of inviting Vaidahi on the show for a long time,
[Amit Varma]: and I finally got around to doing it now. The ostensible peg for our conversation was
[Amit Varma]: how COVID would change our cities and what our cities need to do to combat COVID-19.
[Amit Varma]: But we also took a step back and spoke about urbanization and the history of cities, as
[Amit Varma]: also the field of economics itself. Before we get to our conversation, though, let's
[Amit Varma]: take a quick emotional break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive. The Scene and the Unseen has been a labor of love for me. I've enjoyed putting
[Amit Varma]: together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours
[Amit Varma]: as well. But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off
[Amit Varma]: the show. Although The Scene and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really
[Amit Varma]: woken up to the insane engagement level of podcasts, and I do many, many hours of deep
[Amit Varma]: research for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself. Scheduling
[Amit Varma]: guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel, and so on. So, well, I'm trying
[Amit Varma]: a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves you. My proposition for you
[Amit Varma]: is this. For every episode of The Scene and the Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of
[Amit Varma]: coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can do this by heading
[Amit Varma]: over to sceneunseen.in slash support, and contributing an amount of your choice. This
[Amit Varma]: is not a subscription. The Scene and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps
[Amit Varma]: and at sceneunseen.in. This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help keep this thing going.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for having me, Amit. Yeah, it's been a while coming because our mutual
[Amit Varma]: friend Shruti Rajagopalan keeps telling me that, you know, why don't you get Vaidehi
[Amit Varma]: on your show? What is wrong with you? You are both in Mumbai, which is of course true
[Amit Varma]: though now, both of us being in Mumbai is sort of a moot point in these days. So, now
[Amit Varma]: that you know, you're finally on the show, and we've bumped into each other at events,
[Amit Varma]: but never actually had a conversation. So I'm looking kind of looking forward to knowing
[Amit Varma]: more about where you come from, and so on. So tell me a bit about, you know, your journey
[Amit Varma]: so far, not just your journey in terms of academics and career and all of that, but
[Amit Varma]: also in terms of, you know, your intellectual journey, what are your influences? What are
[Guest]: the things that have shaped you? Right, so I started off wanting to be a journalist actually
[Guest]: in school. And so I always knew I wanted to get a BA. So I scored decent enough for me
[Guest]: to get into Xavier. So that was like a big thing. And I wanted to major in literature
[Guest]: back then. But you have to choose other subjects along with your, you know, main major. So
[Guest]: I've taken economics. And we didn't have economics at school before that was only in the 11th
[Guest]: and 12th. That was the first time I got exposed to economics, you know, as a discipline, and
[Guest]: it kind of blew my mind. And I sort of eventually veered away from literature, and then ended
[Guest]: up dumping it for economics and ended up majoring in economics. Went on to do my master's again,
[Guest]: by then journalism was no longer a dream as such, I was thinking more about getting into
[Guest]: academia. And my master's really helped because I mean, it was at that time, you know, the
[Guest]: Department of Economics, it started its first semester course, and we were like the second
[Guest]: batch to enter this new course with a lot more rigor and you know, a proper semester
[Guest]: based system and we had excellent professors. Many of them sadly have retired now. But at
[Guest]: that time, it was a great environment to study. You know, we really got down into the weeds
[Guest]: and you know, both in mathematical, you know, formality of the treatment of the subject,
[Guest]: as well as going beyond neoclassical economics to discover other things like, you know, institutional
[Guest]: economics, public choice theory, and the kind of electives I picked back then were extremely
[Guest]: important and useful in how I've ended up looking at policies and looking and where
[Guest]: my research has taken me. So that was sort of like a journey in terms of the academic
[Guest]: journey. And I eventually ended up doing my PhD under one of my professors back then,
[Guest]: who was at the department, and it ended up being in urban economics, but I approached
[Guest]: it from a political economy lens, looking at things like transactions, cost economics
[Guest]: and so on. And yeah, and then since then, I mean, I think I've been at IDFC Institute,
[Guest]: which is the research policy think tank in Mumbai. And you've had guests on the show,
[Guest]: you know, been my colleagues. So I've been here since 2014. I took one year off to get
[Guest]: a postdoc at Columbia. But I've been here since and been basically working on public
[Guest]: policy research in urban areas and also in business regulatory environment.
[Amit Varma]: I find a couple of strands intriguing here. One is that, you know, you said, you know,
[Amit Varma]: beginning to study economics blew your mind. And I was curious about why this is so because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I remember, you know, back from my time, and I didn't study economics, actually
[Amit Varma]: studied literature. And but I remember from that time that the economics that was taught
[Amit Varma]: in Indian colleges was just boring and dull. And basically, it was meant to drive you away
[Amit Varma]: from the subject. And it wasn't interesting at all. So, you know, was this particular
[Amit Varma]: course different in that sense? And the other question regarding this I have is that one
[Amit Varma]: lemon that I have heard even from economists is that a lot of modern economics training
[Amit Varma]: is too focused on data and the math and the econometrics and all of that. And you are
[Amit Varma]: no longer sort of looking at broad concepts to make sense of the world. Like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one of the ways in which I think literature and economics actually related is that they
[Amit Varma]: both give you insight into human behavior. And that's always why I've been like economics
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, at different times, I've never been formally trained, blown my mind as well.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd be interested in knowing, you know, what are the ways in which it blew your mind?
[Amit Varma]: Did you sort of contextualize learnings of economics to your through the life around
[Amit Varma]: you and realize that, hey, these are not arcane things, these really matter?
[Guest]: I very vividly remember my first class in economics, where they teach you the principle
[Guest]: of diminishing marginal utility. And it's a very simple sort of class, very non technical.
[Guest]: I mean, they'll draw a graph, which was a downward curve, and there'll be like, mangoes
[Guest]: on the one side, and like, your y axis will be a utility. And basically saying, the more
[Guest]: mangoes you have, the additional one appeals less and less to you. And I was just like,
[Guest]: wait, there's a term for this, you know, and, and that was just like, what's going on. So
[Guest]: I think from then on, it was, it's not like the course we had was very, you know, amazing
[Guest]: or very up to date in terms of, it's a Mumbai University undergraduate economics course.
[Guest]: So very, very basic stuff, catered to like a very, you know, non mathematical sort of
[Guest]: a batch of students. But still, it was things like this that I kept on discovering, which
[Guest]: I was like, Oh, I mean, this sort of makes sense. It just ended up answering questions
[Guest]: that I didn't know I had. And it allowed me to understand and name concepts like opportunity
[Guest]: costs, for instance. That was another thing. I was like, Oh, wait, yeah, this, this makes
[Guest]: sense. And there's a word for it. So I can now actually use it and make sense of the
[Guest]: more sense of the world around me. So these, these ideas were the ones that were what attracted
[Guest]: me to it. And what drew I mean, it's so the love for literature continued, I dropped it
[Guest]: only in my third year, I was doing lit in in first year and second year, but it allowed
[Guest]: me structure, whereas literature was there for me to get into the motivations of people,
[Guest]: the inner motivations for people, of people, what economics was allowing me to do was looking
[Guest]: at systems. And like, you know, looking from a systems approach, I could not find a better
[Guest]: way of, of trying to explain the world around me. So yeah, so I think that's, that's how
[Guest]: I feel the the tools sort of helped me look at the world in very different ways. But I
[Guest]: mean, equally important ways about your question about, you know, the formal, the math obsession
[Guest]: in economics, it exists, and it's been a product of a number of factors. So I mean, we don't
[Guest]: I don't want to get into that, because that's probably another episode. And I don't think
[Guest]: I'm the best person to talk about it, because I only learned as much as was enough for me
[Guest]: to, you know, get by. But I think there was a period of time when there was a lot of empiricism.
[Guest]: So the econometrics and the empiricism and the like the clever ways in which you define
[Guest]: your identification strategies, which is basically the way in which you establish a causal relationship
[Guest]: between x phenomenon and a y phenomenon, that led to a lot of emphasis on showing off these
[Guest]: various types of identification strategies. So your role, you know, emphasis was on looking
[Guest]: for not the questions, but what is the interesting data that with which I can do some fancy stuff
[Guest]: and have a nice relationship. But I think over time, there has been shift back to looking
[Guest]: at some of the fundamental things. And I think we've gone to sort of balancing the two things.
[Guest]: So I feel for instance, I really like the work that so Karthik, who was on your show,
[Guest]: so his work, then the stuff that Raj Chetty do on social mobility, and these questions
[Guest]: are extremely fundamental for us as a society. So they're not looking at trivial questions.
[Guest]: And they're in it for like, they're really, really committed to this. It's not like they're
[Guest]: moving from one interesting problem to the next, because, you know, they just want to
[Guest]: show off their tricks. But it's a deep commitment. And, and they bring a lot of a mathematical
[Guest]: result to try and understand it. So I'm not complaining, to be honest, in terms of where
[Guest]: it's moved now, perhaps 20 years, or even 10 years earlier, it may have been the case
[Guest]: that there was, or perhaps I'm just reading the ones, the people I like. So I think that
[Guest]: this is how things have moved on, whereas, whereas the reality is completely different.
[Amit Varma]: And reading the ones you like also has a word for it, which is selection bias. Sort of a
[Amit Varma]: tangential question here, when you when you spoke about how, you know, Karthik and Raj
[Amit Varma]: Chetty are not sort of just showing off, you know, their tricks. And, you know, the thought
[Amit Varma]: that struck me earlier, when you were talking about how, you know, people would get carried
[Amit Varma]: away with their econometric models, and just try to show everything is, you know, I'm reminded,
[Amit Varma]: and this is a bit of a tangent, but I'm reminded of this essay that the philosopher Agnes Callard
[Amit Varma]: wrote recently, where which are linked from the show notes, of course, and where she sort
[Amit Varma]: of was speaking about why academic writing is so dense. And her point there was that
[Amit Varma]: once you get on a tenure track, you're expected to publish in certain journals and blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah. And those journals have their own conventions and so on. And therefore, you have to follow
[Amit Varma]: those conventions. And what you are therefore writing for is to get accepted into those
[Amit Varma]: journals and not to really make your writing have an impact on the wider world at large.
[Amit Varma]: And would there be a similar thing with, you know, the use of math and economics, where
[Amit Varma]: at one point in time, you know, using complicated econometrics became almost a way of signaling
[Amit Varma]: to your peers, or the sort of people around you of how sophisticated your work is, and
[Amit Varma]: how rigorous you are, and blah, blah, blah, and not really having that sort of an impact
[Amit Varma]: on a wider readership. And also, you know, and you haven't really been an academic per
[Amit Varma]: se, thankfully, but is there, therefore, some kind of dichotomy within, you know, academics
[Amit Varma]: or within the field of economics, for example, where, you know, there is a trade off between
[Amit Varma]: how much you can change the world by actually having an impact on the real world and studying
[Amit Varma]: things that matter in the real world as, you know, Karthik and Raj do, and you do, in fact,
[Amit Varma]: or so is there a, you know, trade off between that and just doing impressive work, which
[Amit Varma]: will sort of get you ahead or get you noticed?
[Guest]: So I think that most of the people, again, I have, I've only looked at this in your track
[Guest]: system, miles away sitting here in India. So I'm going to add that as a huge caveat
[Guest]: in what I'm going to say. My sense is that in the field of economics, at least, the work
[Guest]: that the established tenured professors do is very different from the ones who are just
[Guest]: out of the job market. So for the ones who are just out of the job market, the incentives
[Guest]: are very different, right? You need to produce in certain journals for about five years.
[Guest]: But as I guess, if you study the kinds of papers, let's say, an above average econ grad
[Guest]: writes at the beginning of their career, and then how and as they sort of progress, you
[Guest]: know, once they get tenure and the work that they do after, I think that it will change.
[Guest]: My sense is that you will start off with, you know, just trying to get published and
[Guest]: at least have those one two papers, because it takes a long time, like a life cycle of
[Guest]: papers, five years, you know, if you want to get into a top journal. So it takes a long
[Guest]: time. So you will, you know, try and see what the work you're doing is sort of going to
[Guest]: get you published. And so it's more geared towards that. Once those constraints are relaxed,
[Guest]: that's when the sort of real, I guess, not real, I mean, I don't mean the effort, these
[Guest]: are like very, very soul crushing, you know, type of work that that people do and the kind
[Guest]: of journeys that they undertake. But once you're established, I think that that's when
[Guest]: you start doing the long term stuff, start looking at taking on larger projects, and
[Guest]: sort of expanding and trying to impact policy. And so the, you know, the classics of the
[Guest]: world, the Jonathan Grubers of the world, and the, they all sort of come into their
[Guest]: own at the later part of post tenure. So that's the, that's what my take is. So it's about
[Guest]: like, just early stage career versus later stage career, the incentives that exist there
[Guest]: and that lead into the kind of work that happens.
[Amit Varma]: I like the phrase, the Karthiks of the world, I hope Karthik is listening, it becomes a
[Amit Varma]: popular phrase. And it also, you know, I was kind of struck by what you just said about
[Amit Varma]: the life cycle of a paper being five years, because that whole system of academic publishing,
[Amit Varma]: the long time lags, the whole peer review system seems so nonsensical and bizarre to
[Amit Varma]: me, I understand that there are trade offs involved. But, you know, just sitting on the
[Amit Varma]: outside, it seems like it's completely, you know, warped on one side, and the kind of
[Amit Varma]: work you do, of course, is very different. I was struck by, you know, you were saying
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, when you did your master's, and you studied further, your sort of specialization
[Amit Varma]: area was urbanism, with a focus on the political economy, you know, both of these going together,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of made me sit up, because I thought it's almost as if, you know, IDFC Institute
[Amit Varma]: went back in time, and they gave the requirements to the university, and then they produced
[Amit Varma]: you because that's sort of exactly both what you do now. And I think what in these times
[Amit Varma]: is necessary now, I mean, we need a scholarship and work in these areas. So tell me a bit
[Amit Varma]: about what drew you to that specific subject at that time.
[Guest]: There was a bunch of things. So I've lived in a city all my life. And initially, as a
[Guest]: kid, I remember like completely hating it. Because I used to long to, you know, get out
[Guest]: of the city and go on trips with my parents and family holidays and things like that.
[Guest]: And we used to hate railway stations and all the crowds around. If you come to Mumbai,
[Guest]: you know, there's enough reason for you to hate Mumbai. But as I think, grew, I guess,
[Guest]: I mean, in my college days, I was when I realized that, okay, there's some reason why people
[Guest]: are coming here. And it does seem to be making, you know, life easier for people. And you
[Guest]: could see this from, I mean, I could see this, as I grew up, I realized my parents also had
[Guest]: the same journey, rather, my grandfather did, he moved to a city, if he had stayed back
[Guest]: in the village, he would not have got the opportunity that he did, when he moved. Of
[Guest]: course, it helped that there was social networks in the city that, you know, allowed him to
[Guest]: get a foothold and so on. And it has two generations on the line, you know, it's made a difference
[Guest]: to how we live. So those kinds of things sort of struck me. And, again, I think the art
[Guest]: department was among the handful of departments in the country that offers a paper on urban
[Guest]: economics. So I said, Okay, let's take it. And I along with this, so I took an elective
[Guest]: on public choice theory, and I took another elective on just trade, basically, we had
[Guest]: an international trade. And I feel like all of these sort of have, you know, they do combine.
[Guest]: And so it's, when I actually ended up sitting on for my first urban eco lecture, it was
[Guest]: very similar to what happened when I sat in my first eco lecture, you know, where my professor
[Guest]: who later went on to be my PhD supervisor was, was trying to explain to us what what's
[Guest]: the secret sauce? Why? Why do cities prosper? And what makes some cities grow and prosper?
[Guest]: And why do some cities fail? And, and so it just, again, it gave me a lot more insight
[Guest]: and understanding. And, you know, after my master, I was talking with the I knew I wanted
[Guest]: to do a PhD anyway. So I was going between like, moving, you know, taking a gap year,
[Guest]: getting some research work, and then moving to the US or staying here. And I, I knew that
[Guest]: I'd only stay if my then urban eco professor said he'd take me on as a student, and he
[Guest]: was happy to so I said, Okay, let's I have no reason to go then it's fine. I mean, life
[Guest]: is nice. You know, you have you can be at home, you can do your thesis and, and the
[Guest]: university is lovely. If you visited it at any point in Kalina, it's a nice green place,
[Guest]: you have nice chai. So I was like, fine, this looks good.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, it's very interesting. I used to pass the university almost every day, because
[Amit Varma]: I used to be a professional poker player for five years. And one of the games I regularly
[Amit Varma]: played illegal underground games, of course, was in New Mumbai. So I would go there via
[Amit Varma]: the SCLR. And therefore, and I hated the thought of the university, because that was the most
[Amit Varma]: crowded road, that particular stretch, but that's a bizarre and completely unrequired
[Amit Varma]: tangent, in contrast with most of the engines I take. So and also, you mentioned sort of
[Amit Varma]: the political economy aspect of it. And then you sort of joined IDFC Institute, which calls
[Amit Varma]: itself a think and do tank. So where, you know, the whole idea is that we don't just
[Amit Varma]: think about things and diagnose that, oh, this is a problem. And this is what we should
[Amit Varma]: do. But you actually try to work with the state and kind of getting things done. So
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about that difference between a think tank and a think and do tank.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, how does that affect the work that you do? Does all your work then have
[Amit Varma]: this extra layer of, you know, how practical is it to make things happen in this area?
[Amit Varma]: So are you not just whenever you're studying x, are you not just studying x, but also x
[Guest]: plus the government's role in whatever it can do?
[Guest]: That's an interesting question, because I have not looked at the work that I do from,
[Guest]: you know, how feasible it will be to get it implemented. It's always been about we've
[Guest]: been lucky that as you mentioned, right, it's a nice match where the questions that excited
[Guest]: me or the questions that the Institute was waiting to and wanting to investigate. So
[Guest]: the way we started out doing work was, we were a very small organization. And Ruben,
[Guest]: my boss, he sort of let us, gave us a free run. He said, you know, what interests you,
[Guest]: what excites you? Why don't you take up a research idea that you think, you know, you
[Guest]: will be able to deliver on? So first work that I did along with my colleague Komal Hiranandani
[Guest]: and Mudit Kapoor, who was then a visiting fellow, he's an associate professor at ISI
[Guest]: Delhi. So three of us were working, we started working on this idea of trying to measure
[Guest]: urbanization in the country, using a different metric than what the government uses, to try
[Guest]: and see whether India is different, and whether India looks different, whether it's more urban
[Guest]: than the official definition seem to suggest. And official definitions, I mean, suggest
[Guest]: that we are 31% urban. And that's the census definition. If you, if you look at the just,
[Guest]: if you just count the number of municipal areas in the country, then that would account
[Guest]: for 26% of the country's population. So it's even lower. And it's surprising given India's
[Guest]: per capita incomes, you know, about, we're fairly rich, but our urbanization rates are
[Guest]: not reflecting that. So is that a quirk of the definition that we're using? That's the
[Guest]: path we took. It led to some interesting insights, some interesting results, we can discuss that
[Guest]: later at a later stage. But what we realized is, is where sort of the do piece comes is
[Guest]: the fact that we tend to speak, we don't just keep think about research as a product that
[Guest]: will be printed in a journal or as a report and be kept on the shelves. But actively speaking
[Guest]: to government policy experts about it. And of course, sort of, it helps to have built
[Guest]: so and this, this is the strength that say, Ruben brought, where he is, you know, well
[Guest]: networked, and he knows that, you know, he'd be able to interest not just Indian experts,
[Guest]: but even international experts in the kind of research findings that that we were producing.
[Guest]: So we could do a lot of presentations, we've presented at various forums, you know, to
[Guest]: the government to other urban experts, to even bureaucrats in various. So it's a lot
[Guest]: about actually going and talking about it and trying to sort of, it's the marketing
[Guest]: piece. And it's equally important, because we believed in the rigor of our research,
[Guest]: and we believed in the findings. And we knew we had enough analytical rigor to stand on
[Guest]: to be able to go and present. So that's the sort of approach that the Institute takes.
[Guest]: It's about a like creating the research and using enough rigor. I mean, we don't want
[Guest]: to necessarily publish, you know, in the top five journals. So it's certainly not going
[Guest]: to be that level of rigor where you're looking at the number of asterisks on your coefficient
[Guest]: and so on. But it's enough that it will pass like, you know, any scrutiny, any sensible
[Guest]: sort of person can see the logic. And, you know, that was the way in which we thought
[Guest]: about the research that we do. And of course, like, ensuring that you write op-eds, ensuring
[Guest]: that you speak to people, ends up sort of, you know, having some impact, I will again
[Guest]: not say, in a policy space, again, this is stuff that some of that Ruben and others also
[Guest]: say that in the policy space, you can really make no positive claims in the work that you
[Guest]: do and the, and the policies that get framed. In fact, you know, you should, one can't make
[Guest]: any, any causal claims, because that's disingenuous in a certain sense. But, but talking to people
[Guest]: is something that is what every sort of serious research slash policy expert has to do. You
[Guest]: have to keep talking, you have to keep writing for the lay public.
[Amit Varma]: Ruben's been a good friend for like, almost 15 years. And the way I have often described
[Amit Varma]: him as a way that you just described him that one, of course, he's one of the most brilliant
[Amit Varma]: people I know. But also, he is by far the best networker I know. And not networker in
[Amit Varma]: a sense of for the schmoozy kind of networker, but the networker in terms of actually getting
[Amit Varma]: things done. I mean, to use Gladwell's terms, he's not just a connector, but also a maven,
[Amit Varma]: which is a sort of a unique combination. I had Ruben and Pitika on the show last year.
[Amit Varma]: And in an episode I linked from the show notes where we spoke about precisely that study
[Amit Varma]: how India is more urban than most people think up to 45% urban. And you know, as you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out in a piece you wrote this January with two co authors, where, you know, you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that if you take the metric of 5000 people as as an urban area, Kerala is actually 100%
[Amit Varma]: urban, you know, so that whole statistic that came earlier in the year, the three of the
[Amit Varma]: 10 fastest growing cities in the world are in Kerala. And that makes sense. And although
[Amit Varma]: I covered this area with Ruben and Pitika, but nevertheless, give me a sense of why this
[Amit Varma]: matters is this whole sense of what is defined as an urban area and what is not I mean, obviously
[Amit Varma]: definitions matter, because whatever is defined as an urban area is ruled by an urban body
[Amit Varma]: with its own rules. So your roads have to be this wide. And these are the services that
[Amit Varma]: have to be provided. And a rural governing body doesn't have those same restrictions.
[Amit Varma]: So you get a different quality of service. So tell me briefly, you know, why it matters
[Amit Varma]: and what is sort of holding us back from recognizing that, you know, we are as urban as we actually
[Guest]: are. So why it matters is something that, as you mentioned, every place, if you go to
[Guest]: the fundamentals of it, what distinguishes a rural area from an urban area is that the
[Guest]: urban urban areas tend to be denser, they tend to be larger in size, and their base
[Guest]: of economic activity is not agriculture. Right. And so they're fundamentally different from
[Guest]: a rural place. So they don't require irrigation facilities, they require, say, building bylaws,
[Guest]: right, where, which allow you to have some mixed use zoning and so on, and allow you
[Guest]: to build a non agricultural sort of construction and so on. So their needs are different there.
[Guest]: And it's again, it's coming from the fact that urban areas have something that that
[Guest]: rural areas don't, which is economies of scale and agglomeration economies, right. So what
[Guest]: the large populations what the densities allow you to do is a bunch of things, they allow
[Guest]: you to share ideas faster, because you, you tend to meet a lot more people, innovators,
[Guest]: famously, you know, a lot of the innovations come from the from the most urban parts of
[Guest]: the world and people will pay a premium to look at that you have, you know, very high
[Guest]: talent, you will want to locate in a place where there are other talented people and
[Guest]: smart people like you. So that's, that's one of the reasons why the urban sort of the densities
[Guest]: and the sizes of the city is sort of self reinforcing. So once you have high productivity
[Guest]: advantages from being in the city, it will attract more people, which will again lead
[Guest]: to higher productivity. But there's a downside to this, which is, you know, I think, I forget
[Guest]: who it was, but there's that three famous disagglomeration effects. One is congestion,
[Guest]: one is crime, and contagion. So three Cs. And that's why you need a different type of
[Guest]: because these externalities exist, you need different types of governance mechanisms for
[Guest]: cities as compared to villages and rural areas. Now, what happens is when you apply a definition
[Guest]: for urban versus rural area, the underlying assumption is that your definition is accurately
[Guest]: identifying a settlement as urban. When you apply a definition that does not do that.
[Guest]: So suppose you apply a definition that is extremely strict, like India's definition
[Guest]: is, you may end up, you know, misclassifying urban areas of village. And then that means
[Guest]: that even though there are these potential agglomeration effects that there are no governance
[Guest]: systems that can mitigate the disagglomeration. Right? So that's the issue. If you misclassify,
[Guest]: and that's why it's important to correctly classify. The other reason it's important
[Guest]: to correctly classify is because, at least in India, you have several schemes that are
[Guest]: targeted only to rural areas. And this has come out again, in the current debate, where
[Guest]: now there's some debate on having an urban employment guarantee scheme, because what
[Guest]: you think is traditionally because rural areas have worse off in terms of socioeconomic characteristics,
[Guest]: you need to give them special benefits, you need to have special schemes, special programs
[Guest]: to rural areas. But if you are misidentifying the rural areas, that means that some of the
[Guest]: money is going to urban like rural areas, right? And that's a misclassification of resources.
[Guest]: You can obviously debate the need for this rural urban classification based on current
[Guest]: definitions. Because, to me, if you are going to implement a scheme that will help the vulnerable
[Guest]: people, it should be targeted to the people irrespective of where they live. Like, I mean,
[Guest]: this one first filter of where they live, and then identifying the households within
[Guest]: those areas is, to me, you know, a very inefficient way of going about doing things. But it's
[Guest]: convenient, it's easy, or I guess it's easy to implement, because we have traditional
[Guest]: rural departments and urban departments looking at rural development and urban development
[Guest]: separately. That's, I guess, that's, that's the reason why this happens. So that's, that's
[Guest]: the second reason why you need to get definitions, right? Because you need to be able to if you
[Guest]: if you're targeting is based on where a person lives, then you need to identify that place
[Guest]: correctly. Now, why is the government not proactive in correcting the definitions? You
[Guest]: know, if it is aware that there's a problem, then why is nothing being done about it? To
[Guest]: that the answer sort of depends, it depends on the state governments. So in our constitution,
[Guest]: local governments are under the state list. So the state that has to set out the rules
[Guest]: to identify urban local bodies, the center can give broad guidelines, but the states
[Guest]: have their own municipal acts for identifying urban local bodies. And there's political
[Guest]: reasons sometimes for the states not to notify a town, even if it is, you know, has all urban
[Guest]: like features. There's also pressure from the ground up at times. So it's not just that
[Guest]: the state is at fault, there are at times demands from the citizens to not be classified
[Guest]: from a rural to urban area, just as there are demands from the citizens. There have
[Guest]: been historic demands from the citizens to actually be called a city, you know, because
[Guest]: they think that they have the necessary numbers and the economic base to be done. So there's
[Guest]: again, there's three reasons why. So the citizens will resist any conversion, if it means that
[Guest]: they will lose out on the rural schemes, right? If you become urban, and if you no longer
[Guest]: get NREGA or PMG-SY, these other things, then your incentives are not to become urban. Businesses
[Guest]: sometimes also resist, so local businesses, because if they switch, then they may be subjected
[Guest]: to higher taxation, they may be subjected to higher rents, you know, just the cost of
[Guest]: doing business may go up, as opposed to being in a village where the regulations are a bit
[Guest]: different. This tax thing also applies to villagers, because cities are typically levy
[Guest]: property taxes. So if you're a, you know, a village, then the households don't need
[Guest]: to pay a property tax. So these are the factors that can cause some resistance. And there's
[Guest]: one more factor, which is the panchayat leaders themselves. So historically, some states have
[Guest]: done very well in, in terms of the democratic decentralization of within the panchayati
[Guest]: raj system, right? You have very strong elections, and you know, very well entrenched political
[Guest]: parties, and so on, and leaders within the village. If there's a fear that the village
[Guest]: gets either amalgamated into a larger town nearby, or if it gets converted into an urban
[Guest]: area, it's a very different electoral system. So in cities, you have mayors, mayors have
[Guest]: no real powers as compared to a sarpanch, right? A mayor is typically indirectly elected,
[Guest]: typically not even for the same duration as his or her government would be. So that's
[Guest]: the reason why say, political leaders would resist. But at the same time, there are countervailing
[Guest]: factors also, as I mentioned, there have been people who fought to be within the city because
[Guest]: they've realized that there are costs to having haphazard construction in their villages,
[Guest]: which lead to building collapse, and so on. And, and, you know, they would like to get
[Guest]: certain facilities, like, say, a big municipal hospital or some, some other amenities that
[Guest]: say, a municipal body will be able to provide them. So it's not that it just goes one way.
[Guest]: And you don't know, ultimately, like, which force ends up winning. But these are the different
[Guest]: contestations that take place in in sort of determining an urban or a rural status. Yeah,
[Guest]: and it differs, I mean, greatly from state. So we've seen that, for instance, West Bengal
[Guest]: and Kerala tend to have very few urban local body. And, I mean, this is just a hypothesis,
[Guest]: I was just thinking about it, it could be because they have a very, very strong tradition
[Guest]: of decentralization and decentralized government. And so the, so I guess that there's a lot
[Guest]: of power at the local levels to sort of resist conversion or sort of get the states to agree
[Guest]: to not convert them. So these are also areas where a lot of the new urbanization that's
[Guest]: coming up, they're not come under an urban local body, it's, it's either classified as
[Guest]: urban by the census, but all it is sort of, they're just large settlements that continue
[Amit Varma]: to be called villages.
[Amit Varma]: It's so fascinating, and almost surreal that, you know, little things like definitions can
[Amit Varma]: make such a huge difference in outcomes and in the lives of actual people, you know, before
[Amit Varma]: I kind of proceed, I think, you know, just for our listeners, I should, you know, quickly
[Amit Varma]: explain what I think is a common premise to both of us, which is that cities are a damn
[Amit Varma]: good thing, urbanization is fantastic, we should continue to urbanize. Very briefly,
[Amit Varma]: the reasons for this include, of course, that, you know, we denser, higher population density
[Amit Varma]: means, you know, bigger economic networks, which we can access vastly more opportunities,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth, which is why, you know, however much people bemoan cities, it
[Amit Varma]: is generally people living in cities who bemoan them as they live in cities. You know, the
[Amit Varma]: bottom line is that so many people voluntarily come to a city and their revealed preference
[Amit Varma]: tells you something about why that is. Also, from the point of view of the environment,
[Amit Varma]: cities are a great thing, because cities allow you allow the state to say provide things
[Amit Varma]: like water and electricity and so on, to people at a far lower per capita cost than would
[Amit Varma]: otherwise be the case. Now, obviously, there are a lot of ways in which Indian city could
[Amit Varma]: be optimized better, like if they were higher, if they, you know, reclaim the sky in the
[Amit Varma]: phrase of Alex Tabarrok, our mutual friend, and all of that. And, you know, I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to turn now to what I would call the pandemic paradox, which is that the, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: pandemic, you know, inverts some of these processes in the sense that while otherwise
[Amit Varma]: population density is such a fantastic and desirable thing, desirable, because it forms
[Amit Varma]: in the first place, because it's desirable, because people are voluntarily moving to cities,
[Amit Varma]: but in a pandemic is the other way around. In a pandemic, it's literally fatal. Tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about how sort of pandemics of the past have, you know, affected cities
[Amit Varma]: like you've, you've written about this yourself about, you know, how, you know, the plague
[Amit Varma]: changed Athens forever in 430 BC, Pericles died, among others, a century later, Constantinople,
[Amit Varma]: and cities have always sort of had a tough time with pandemics, like you said, the third
[Amit Varma]: risk of that you pointed out, which is contagion, you know, so how has that gone in the past?
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, cities have always rebounded, because people have always assumed that, okay,
[Amit Varma]: there are trade offs, that there is a risk to going to cities like, you know, like you've
[Amit Varma]: pointed out, you know, in the 19th century, the mortality rate in the life expectancy
[Amit Varma]: in cities was actually less in rural areas, sometimes by as much as six, seven years,
[Amit Varma]: because there were hubs of disease, there was no concept of public health, you know,
[Amit Varma]: people had wrong notions, there was a point in time where people didn't even realize that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, open water and open drainage can, you know, lead to diseases like cholera and
[Amit Varma]: whatever, which is why the life expectancy was lower, but people still, you know, realizing
[Amit Varma]: the trade off of this still chose to go to cities, because the opportunities were just
[Amit Varma]: way, way greater. So give me a sense of how through history, what's been the relationship
[Amit Varma]: between, you know, cities and pandemics and how people think about both? Yeah, I think
[Guest]: there was an interesting example that Ed Glazer gave when he said, an Irishman, you know,
[Guest]: back in the day, would rather, you know, choose the likelihood of giving, getting cholera
[Guest]: moving to a city over like being subjected to the say, the potato famines. So it's never
[Guest]: been a very easy trade off, you were essentially choosing the lesser of the two years, and
[Guest]: anything that increased your chances of survival, it's it, it was, it was quite bleak in, back
[Guest]: in the 19th centuries. And several examples of, of large epidemics, breaking out and claiming
[Guest]: millions of lives exist. Starting, I mean, of course, with the cholera epidemics in London,
[Guest]: New York City also had yellow fever epidemics, cholera epidemics. In Mumbai, we also had
[Guest]: bubonic plagues in the late 1800s. So our Epidemic Diseases Act actually comes from
[Guest]: there. It comes from the bubonic plague in Bombay. And, and what was done, I mean, the
[Guest]: act was then created in order to help the like rulers tackle the pandemic. So it's been
[Guest]: a feature, I mean, a bug rather, of our cities, that we had, because of the invention of germ
[Guest]: theory, because of very, very massive investments in public health infrastructure, managed to
[Guest]: keep at bay. So that's how we, we saw these kind of large scale epidemics getting fewer
[Guest]: and farther in between. And whenever they cropped up, there was easier ways to tackle
[Guest]: them. You know, people knew enough, there was enough for vaccines and all these scientific
[Guest]: advancements that helped you live in the city. So that sort of that bleak choice that existed
[Guest]: earlier no longer was the case. So it sort of attracted more people. We also see this
[Guest]: as a time like the early 20th century is a time when the city started growing in size.
[Guest]: Because the cities in those days were much larger than the cities in the previous centuries,
[Guest]: because you'd solve for these, you know, very grim problems. So the ways in which you can
[Guest]: solve them exist, and they continue to exist. But I think what also started happening was
[Guest]: in the 1960s onward, the more the urbanization sort of the stage for the next phase of urbanization
[Guest]: shifted from these very developed countries to the developing world, which has not yet
[Guest]: I mean, we know what's to be done, we know that you need to make investments in clean
[Guest]: water, sanitation, and so on. But for various state capacity reasons, maybe even, you know,
[Guest]: the type of government that you have, these are not either policy priorities, or they're
[Guest]: just not being well implemented. For these reasons, when this next stage of urbanization
[Guest]: kicked off in the developing countries, this sort of problem has sort of emerged as, again,
[Guest]: one of the ugly facets of urbanization. And the pandemic was honestly something that was,
[Guest]: it's affected all countries, of course, it's affected the cities much harder, even the
[Guest]: cities in developed countries, simply because of the nature of the densities that we've
[Guest]: we've talked about. But what's different this time around is, of course, we have a lot more
[Guest]: scientific advancement, we know what has to be done, it's just a matter of time, as they
[Guest]: say, before vaccines are coming up. It's not that everyone's just, you know, put out put
[Guest]: up their hands and is waiting for death or some situation like that. We are all waiting
[Guest]: for death. Well, hopefully for death at some point later, not death due to pandemic. But
[Guest]: what's happened is, we, because in the developing world, the cities have just become too large,
[Guest]: and too badly managed, we are just going to end up having major disasters. I don't know
[Guest]: how I don't know what has happened with we've come far along enough in the pandemic, and
[Guest]: it's not yet like had a very, very bad impact on say, the large cities in Africa, large
[Guest]: cities in in other parts of Asia. And I mean, I don't know, like what that causes, maybe
[Guest]: we'll know a few years later, whether it was a different strain or what, but certainly
[Guest]: if the same level of impact that that hit cities in the developing world, a developed
[Guest]: world had hit the developing world, we would have been seeing large scale sort of devastation
[Guest]: and completely crumbling and broken down infrastructure of all kinds. And we do end up, I mean, in
[Guest]: Mumbai, in the cities in India, where things have, I mean, where the pandemic has hit very
[Guest]: hard, you have seen the city infrastructure struggle. So in this instance, I think the
[Guest]: reason why we've not been able to, even though the lockdown was supposed to allow us to build
[Guest]: up our infrastructure, we were not very able to do that, perhaps because we don't have
[Guest]: systems in place that, you know, or sort of institutions in place that actually plan for
[Guest]: these. Well, we don't have great surveillance systems, and wherever they do exist, they,
[Guest]: you know, say, like Kerala will come out as one of them. And that's also because it had
[Guest]: to deal with, say, a Nipah a few years ago. So it's our entire sort of urban public health
[Guest]: infrastructure and our, which is just healthcare infrastructure, has been geared towards sort
[Guest]: of very limited types of things to do. We don't have in our cities, even though it should
[Guest]: be possible to have, we don't have, you know, disaster planning for like, infectious diseases,
[Guest]: we don't have any sort of infrastructure that does that. And that sort of thinking at an
[Guest]: institutional level is what is a, has sort of let things get made things get worse. The
[Guest]: third thing is, we don't look at public health infrastructure as a, you know, as a public
[Guest]: health problem. So we don't look at, I mean, we look at water and sanitation and public
[Guest]: solid waste management, as very, very, like in silos. And so, okay, we know that if you,
[Guest]: of course, we know the benefits of providing clean water, we know the benefits of, of providing
[Guest]: sanitation, and the, you know, the impact it has on cholera related, typhoid related
[Guest]: deaths, diarrhea related deaths, and all of that is known. But we don't look at all of
[Guest]: this together as something that is important for the city in terms of, from a health perspective,
[Guest]: we look at it from a service provision perspective. I think that's what's ended up happening where
[Guest]: we have different departments doing different things without any common sort of objective
[Guest]: of public health and public health includes like, and these three things get subsumed
[Guest]: under public health, right? We have a separate, we have the silo based way of functioning,
[Guest]: which is, in my opinion, led to some problems that we face and this inability to have a
[Guest]: coordinated way of dealing with diseases.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, that's been a perpetual problem in urban governance that we function in these
[Amit Varma]: silos. I'll come back to that later. And also to the question of, you know, how cities both
[Amit Varma]: here and across the world have sort of been affected by COVID. But before that, just to
[Amit Varma]: take a step back, I have like a two part question, which is, you know, you referred to how that
[Amit Varma]: trade off between, you know, cities being so dangerous, and should we go to cities and
[Amit Varma]: get the economic benefits and the social benefits even of being in cities, how that changed
[Amit Varma]: completely when cities just became much better places to live. And one reason for that, as
[Amit Varma]: you point pointed out was just the growth of knowledge and technology, like you understood
[Amit Varma]: germ theory. And, you know, your technology advanced to the point where you could cure
[Amit Varma]: what would otherwise be severe diseases very quickly, and blah, blah, blah. So that's the
[Amit Varma]: technology part of it. But in terms of governance, you know, what were the things that were done,
[Amit Varma]: which mitigated the impact of cities, you know, that part of the impact of cities where
[Amit Varma]: they became more livable? And the second part of the question is that, did governments did
[Amit Varma]: the state over a period of time get complacent about the possible ill effects of contagion?
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, they had, you know, your technology had advanced enough that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: pandemics weren't breaking out all the time and things seemed okay, did they get complacent?
[Amit Varma]: And is that something that, you know, they will begin to, they are beginning to rethink
[Guest]: now, you think?
[Guest]: So the first thing about what changed in terms of governance, my sense is that the governance
[Guest]: did not change. It was the priorities of existing governments that, within cities that changed,
[Guest]: because they realized that, you know, we need to keep the rich in the city, we need their
[Guest]: tax money, let's, you know, ensure a clean environment, and clean, you know, water and
[Guest]: so on for them, we need businesses to stay. So that was that realization that led to sort
[Guest]: of setting up of these, you know, specialized public health departments or public health
[Guest]: boards that did a lot of surveillance work that planned for where the public health infrastructure
[Guest]: will be, how to bring clean water in from outside the city, you know, through the aqueducts
[Guest]: and so on. So all of that was sort of done through this special, I think, Bombay also
[Guest]: had that in the Bombay Improvement Trust. So the context was different, of course, you
[Guest]: had the British elite living in, you know, certain part of the city, and they, the BIT,
[Guest]: of course, first made sure that those areas are, you know, were prioritized in terms of
[Guest]: ensuring that you have clean sanitation and clean water being provided. And then there
[Guest]: was later on, it was expanded to outside of the, of the colonies, where the working classes
[Guest]: live, only because they realized that, you know, if, if there is any outbreak in these,
[Guest]: you know, very, very dense quarters of weather, where the subjects lived, then it's going
[Guest]: to quickly come into their colonies and affect them. So there was some effort that was done
[Guest]: to widen the roads in the areas where the working classes and the, you know, the Indian
[Guest]: parts of the city. So it came from this incentive, it was about like ensuring the, because these
[Guest]: cities were so economically important to the either the government or the colonial powers
[Guest]: in the case of India, that in terms of the trade and the commerce that they brought in
[Guest]: in terms of the tax dollars, that they brought in that it was a natural priority to try and
[Guest]: make sure that they continue to dominate in the trade and commerce in the, in the world.
[Guest]: Those sort of incentives don't exist as much. I mean, in today's day and age, there's a
[Guest]: lot of, if you look at it different, if you look at the developing countries, this sort
[Guest]: of incentive does not exist as much because the people who should be concerned about Mumbai's
[Guest]: primacy as a global city don't live in Mumbai, you know, the tax dollars that come to Mumbai
[Guest]: are not invested in Mumbai, they go to all other parts. So there's a lot of different
[Guest]: political economy reasons. And I think, I mean, I can talk a little bit about this,
[Guest]: if you want, but there's this thing about that we don't have a decentralized system,
[Guest]: right? You don't have a powerful city leader, who has a vested interest in keeping the city
[Guest]: prosperous, because that would lead to that, you know, him and his government or getting
[Guest]: more revenues, and then you know, that they can invest in and get elected, you know, and
[Guest]: claim that this is what they've done for the city and therefore get elected. So these sort
[Guest]: of electoral incentives are completely broken. And so you don't see, you know, this natural
[Guest]: priority of any city leadership, to make sure that the cities are healthy, is not there
[Guest]: because of these broken electoral incentives, in my opinion.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'd done an episode with Shruti, I think in 2017, or two and a half years ago, where
[Amit Varma]: we spoke about this aspect of urban governance, you know, especially in the context of Maharashtra
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, power and accountability are de-linked here. So the people who are
[Amit Varma]: accountable to voters in Mumbai, or local councillors and whatever, have no power to
[Amit Varma]: make these big decisions. And the people who do have the power in the state government,
[Amit Varma]: the votes that they're chasing are elsewhere, and they don't really care about the city.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you want, you know, sort of governance to be as local as possible. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we don't, so there's a more direct link between, you know, performance and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. So, you know, we'll take a quick commercial break now. And then when we come
[Amit Varma]: back, we'll get right down to the subject at hand, which is COVID and our cities.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games. Well, if you want
[Amit Varma]: to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win-win proposition for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com. Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best contemporary artists in India, and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote
[Amit Varma]: bags, pouches, and home decor items. You get to surround yourself with the finest modern
[Amit Varma]: Indian art at affordable prices, and artists get royalties for every product you buy. Win-win
[Amit Varma]: game. The Indian Colors new range is in, and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for
[Amit Varma]: women, and casual shirts for men, with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta,
[Amit Varma]: Manisha Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, and Jaideep Mehrotra. Stay home, but
[Amit Varma]: dress smart. And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can
[Amit Varma]: show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colors. Corporate
[Amit Varma]: gifting is also available. So head on over to IndianColors.com, that's colors with an
[Amit Varma]: OU, and make art a part of your life. And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right. Unseen for 15% off at IndianColors.com. Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm
[Amit Varma]: chatting with Vaidehi Tandel about how COVID has affected our cities and will continue
[Amit Varma]: to do so. And you know, this is fascinating piece that Ruben and you wrote a few weeks
[Amit Varma]: ago. And I just want to quote from there because I kind of find this fascinating where you're
[Amit Varma]: talking about how, where some cities were less affected than other cities. And quote,
[Amit Varma]: sold with a population density of 16,000 persons per square kilometer, had far fewer cases
[Amit Varma]: in New York. Taipei, whose density is comparable to New York, did not suffer from a serious
[Amit Varma]: outbreak. Other Asian mega cities such as Hanoi, Hong Kong and Bangkok have done well
[Amit Varma]: too. A World Bank study of the outbreak in China shows that population densities in cities
[Amit Varma]: are not correlated to the spread of the virus. Very dense cities such as Beijing, Shanghai
[Amit Varma]: and Tianjin have remained relatively unscathed. Stop quote and apologies if I've, you know,
[Amit Varma]: mispronounced the name of one or more of the Chinese cities. So my question is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one reason, of course, why Southeast Asia dealt with this pandemic better is because
[Amit Varma]: they had experience of previous pandemics. So they could reflexively move into social
[Amit Varma]: distancing mode and it is common there to wear a mask anyway. And, you know, all of
[Amit Varma]: those little normative things help. But from the point of view of what you've studied,
[Amit Varma]: the way cities are governed and so on, like, why do you think there is such a vast difference
[Amit Varma]: between because the assumption is that where the density is greater, the spread of COVID
[Amit Varma]: will be higher. But that's not really borne out by the data. Clearly, there are other
[Amit Varma]: things at play as well. So tell me a little bit about your insights into this.
[Guest]: Yeah, so this was actually largely a piece that came out of, you know, this panic almost
[Guest]: among people that, you know, densities are bad. And there's cities are obviously the
[Guest]: villains and we need to focus on rural development. So it came from the fact that there is not
[Guest]: there needs to be a more nuanced understanding of what densities are. And if this was the
[Guest]: case, why do we not see the most dense parts of the cities, even within cities, the most
[Guest]: dense areas not experiencing high outbreaks. And we realize that it is, of course, the
[Guest]: fact that I mean, one pattern is that if any city has in the recent past had to deal with
[Guest]: an epidemic or a flu like or a SARS like epidemic, they've had the infrastructure in place to
[Guest]: allow like immediate surveillance and, and shutting down and so on and without even actually
[Guest]: going to the drastic step of shutting down and locking down all economic activity even
[Guest]: without doing that have been able to manage this. But we find that in the case of, say,
[Guest]: if you look in Mumbai, and you look at densities across different boards, you're not going
[Guest]: to find the most dense area seeing the outbreaks, you're going to find, perhaps the most, the
[Guest]: areas that are most deficient in amenities, like clean water in terms of, you know, pipe
[Guest]: water in and then also sanitation in terms of having proper indoor toilets, those areas
[Guest]: you're going to see are going to be worst hit. And this was also shown in a recent study
[Guest]: of a CEROS survey that was done by Anup Malani and a bunch of others along with, I think
[Guest]: TIFR, there were scientists there and that those results made a big, you know, like they
[Guest]: made it to the front pages of a lot of papers which showed that slum areas tended to have
[Guest]: a lot higher seroprevalence compared to non-slum areas. We can't conflate slum and non-slum
[Guest]: with more dense and less dense. Because you, you may be living in a dense area, but it
[Guest]: what matters is what is the consumption of floor space that you have? What is, you know,
[Guest]: it's about indoor crowding. If I'm living, you know, if there are a hundred people living
[Guest]: in a building, but I mean, you're living in an area as opposed to a thousand people living
[Guest]: in another area, but the per capita space available to those living in the hundred population
[Guest]: neighborhood is less than the per capita space available to the ones that are living in a
[Guest]: thousand population neighborhood, then we cannot say that, that it's densities that
[Guest]: are at fault. It's the fact that you have not allowed, say, enough construction or you've
[Guest]: not allowed enough floor space, you've not had enough housing to be built, which is leading
[Guest]: to people cramming indoors as opposed to, you know, just looking at densities. What
[Guest]: is an important metric to look at is indoor crowding. And if you ask why indoor crowding
[Guest]: is happening, you will come back to that same question of, you know, why is there not more
[Guest]: construction for the poor? Like, and that leads you to the question of, again, your
[Guest]: whole set of land use constraints that stop people from building more. And that the motivation
[Guest]: for these laws and these regulations of stopping construction, not allowing construction is
[Guest]: ironically a fear of densities. So it's this strange sort of situation where you're blaming
[Guest]: densities, but what's the real culprit is not densities, it's not having enough housing
[Guest]: per capita or not having enough housing space per capita. That's the issue.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's so ironic, and it fits exactly into the framework of the seen and the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: that your intended effect for all these regulations is that let's do away with density, and your
[Amit Varma]: unintended consequences that it's leading to density because you have 15 people cramped
[Amit Varma]: in a crowd, you know, in a small room, because, you know, there's this artificial scarcity
[Amit Varma]: created by bad laws and regulation, in a sense does, you know, like people often say that
[Amit Varma]: a crisis is a good time for reform. And one of the things that this crisis does seem to
[Amit Varma]: have done is pointed out the importance even the urgency of reforms that otherwise people
[Amit Varma]: like, you know, you and me have been writing about for donkey's years, such as, for example,
[Amit Varma]: just FSI reform, where you have, you know, in Alex's words, again, if Mumbai reclaimed
[Amit Varma]: the sky instead of the sea, and it just grew upwards, you'd have less of these 15 people
[Amit Varma]: trapped in a room, you'd have land, which was much more affordable, infrastructure would
[Amit Varma]: keep up with all of this, there would even be more revenues for city governments, though
[Amit Varma]: the Mumbai city government has so much unused revenue that that's hardly an issue. So is
[Amit Varma]: that something that so first of all, you know, when you talk to people within government,
[Amit Varma]: and when you talk to policymakers, and you talk about say things like FSI or rent control,
[Amit Varma]: and talk about how these are actually harming the poor, I mean, that's what they eventually
[Amit Varma]: come down to, because you create scarcities of available land and places to live, prices
[Amit Varma]: go up, it's a poor who suffer and then therefore have to live in these overcrowded slums, where
[Amit Varma]: they are far more vulnerable to contagion. So first of all, even before COVID, was there
[Amit Varma]: a recognition that these are problems? Or would they just indulge you as you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: this stuff? And, you know, they weren't incentivized to do anything about it. And whatever the
[Amit Varma]: answer to that is that would that have changed in any direction? Now, because fixes like
[Amit Varma]: these are powerful structural fixes that are however, long term fixes, you know, not short
[Amit Varma]: term fixes. And my worry here as a citizen who's watched the Indian state closely at
[Amit Varma]: work for decades is that a crisis will come and when the crisis is over, they'll forget
[Amit Varma]: all about it and its business as usual. So what's your sense of sort of dealing with
[Amit Varma]: policymakers on all of this? And do you think that change is likely to happen?
[Guest]: So I'm reluctant to bunch all government people in the same, you know, same bucket, or all
[Guest]: politicians in the same bucket. I think there are enough smart and motivated people in government
[Guest]: who get things done, which is what makes some of the work we do exciting and relevant. Otherwise,
[Guest]: you know, we would be better off just writing op-eds and, you know, instead of talking to
[Guest]: people, instead of talking to government officials, and so on. So there are two ways in which
[Guest]: this could go. There could be a set of people, powerful voices that say that, well, we've
[Guest]: always pointed out that cities were bad. Now look, so why are you, you know, focusing on
[Guest]: cities, focus on on the villages, let's keep the returning workers in the villages and
[Guest]: provide them enough opportunities there. And you know, like, let them not face hardships
[Guest]: and go into cities and, you know, see what look what happened to all of them. These cities
[Guest]: just close their doors and so on. So there's one sort of political voices that would talk
[Guest]: about this. I have, like, not seen at least in the public sphere and a counter voice to
[Guest]: this politically. And that is what is a little disappointing. And that's what makes me pessimistic.
[Guest]: I mean, I think I would know enough people, individual people who would, who are not like
[Guest]: that, who are very, who are still, you know, very bullish on on cities. And, and we again,
[Guest]: we're seeing the return, the workers coming back, right, like those who had gone away
[Guest]: once the economy slowly, you know, came back, restarted. And so if people come back, resume
[Guest]: their old jobs or look for new jobs and so on. So politically, I'm not seeing that sort
[Guest]: of voice. And again, the incentives are different, completely political reasons why certain sides
[Guest]: are being taken versus others. And that's, I think that's a failure to recognize people's
[Guest]: aspirations. I think if you are, it's a to me a very misguided thing for you to believe
[Guest]: that the people who returned will actually stay without trying to understand what their
[Guest]: aspirations are, if their aspirations were to make something of themselves, or, you know,
[Guest]: make sure that the children don't have to face the same hardships that they did, then
[Guest]: the messaging would be very different. I feel I mean, or, I mean, I'm not saying that, in
[Guest]: fact, I guess most, I know nothing about politics. So I shouldn't, I should not talk about what
[Guest]: the how to win votes or what the what winning strategy in this case would be. But in my
[Guest]: mind, it's just that it's a puzzle to me like, are these do these people like, are their
[Guest]: aspirations not being understood? And like, if they were, then you would sort of be talking
[Guest]: about some other things you would be talking about, you know, making sure that your cities
[Guest]: are looking after, you know, the, the most vulnerable people and so on. We're seeing
[Guest]: some of that conversation happen in the, you know, among the people and the organizations
[Guest]: working in the development, the development sector. So the, you know, the World Banks
[Guest]: and all your other multilateral organizations and some other sort of, I guess think tanks
[Guest]: are also trying to think through, okay, let's, let's look at what the issues are with in
[Guest]: terms of say, migrant housing in terms of access to social protection for the urban
[Guest]: poor, and let's try and fix those systems. But ultimately, I mean, it's a political thing.
[Guest]: And I don't, I don't know how it will end up happening, whether or not will end up happening
[Guest]: despite so many people saying, or so many like non-political voices talking about, about
[Guest]: these issues. And if I would just to sort of go a step further, it's also about who
[Guest]: does the fiscal burden fall on, right? So if states where the cities are have to now
[Guest]: be responsible for the people that are coming to work in their cities, that's an added fiscal
[Guest]: burden without on the states, right? And that's something that I don't see states taking on
[Guest]: very willingly, because these are not voters for them. Their World Banks are different.
[Guest]: So these complicated political, you know, calculations make me a lot more pessimistic.
[Guest]: It's not the intentions of people. I don't think, you know, politicians are necessarily
[Guest]: anti-states or whatever, but they have their own reasons for posturing as being anti-city
[Amit Varma]: and so on. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And how much of governance happens below the surface of politics? For example, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I would imagine a politician would be interested and deeply involved in all of the things that
[Amit Varma]: can affect the optics of governance. But there are a lot of things in terms of daily governance,
[Amit Varma]: which happened below the surface, which nobody really notices, which they have no incentive
[Amit Varma]: to really care about one way or the other. So I guess there, the bureaucracy in the deep
[Amit Varma]: state, as it were, sort of becomes much more relevant in terms of what is done and what
[Amit Varma]: is not done. What's your experience of dealing with the bureaucracy in those kind of circumstances?
[Guest]: Again, there are well-intentioned, but somewhat hamstrung by the kind of, you know, structures
[Guest]: that they have put in place. So I've come across bureaucrats who want to do things and
[Guest]: some of them have been able to push through things. I mean, I don't want to name names,
[Guest]: but there have been cities like Pune, cities like Mumbai, cities like Chennai, I have seen
[Guest]: bureaucrats who have been able to do things for the betterment of the city, whether it
[Guest]: is pushing through reforms like, say, property tax systems and so on. So I think there is
[Guest]: some hope at that stage. But again, if you look at the other compulsion or the, I mean,
[Guest]: the other constraint there is that you need the person to be there at least for one entire
[Guest]: political cycle, right? At least for five years for them to actually get the hang of
[Guest]: the department and then figure out what the problems are, and then listen to people who
[Guest]: have the solutions for it, and then, you know, make sure that things get, at least the ball
[Guest]: gets rolling. And that's sort of like, that's not, that's a luxury in the administrative
[Guest]: services, actually. So if you have bureaucrats who've spent enough time, say, as urban managers
[Guest]: or city managers, they tend to be a lot more sensible about like, what's needed, and they've
[Guest]: been able to push through some interesting reforms as well. So yeah, I think it can happen
[Guest]: at the bureaucratic level. But these are, I mean, this is again, I'm speaking from business
[Guest]: as usual times, and this is like a completely different world that we're living in. So I
[Guest]: don't know how their incentives and priorities have changed now. And what are the priorities
[Guest]: of the government at the local level? Unfortunately, I mean, we have not, or at least I have not
[Guest]: had a very deep look at it, or I mean, I've not been privy to that sort of those sort
[Guest]: of conversations, because the goalposts change, the priorities change, you know, from one
[Guest]: week to the next. So it will take, I think, some time for us to start talking about rebuilding
[Guest]: reforms and, and all those kinds of things at the city level.
[Amit Varma]: So in both your recent pieces on this, and the piece you wrote at the end of April in
[Amit Varma]: first post, I think, and then the piece you wrote in July with Ruben and the Hindustan
[Amit Varma]: Times, you'd laid out a bunch of things that the government could do to mitigate it. So
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to go out, go to the four policy suggestions, which you and Ruben mentioned
[Amit Varma]: in the July piece. And the first of these, we've already discussed where the first of
[Amit Varma]: the policy responses you'd like is, quote, addressing crowding by increasing per capita
[Amit Varma]: consumption of floor area by drastically reducing regulatory barriers to construction, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote, which, you know, we've already discussed that, you know, FSI and other regulation which
[Amit Varma]: prevents a far greater supply of housing can be relooked at. By the way, I wish you guys
[Amit Varma]: use a little less jargon and simpler language for somebody like the Hindustan Times, but
[Amit Varma]: never mind that these points are insightful and great. Let's let's turn to the second
[Amit Varma]: of those where you say that quote, administratively, the crisis has taught us that a pandemic response
[Amit Varma]: cannot be federally mandated and requires a decentralized, proximal and accountable
[Amit Varma]: response to enable this city leaders need to be empowered to stop quote, and we've already
[Amit Varma]: spoken a bit about how they are not empowered, there's a gap between power and accountability
[Amit Varma]: and so on. But would you say that more than anything else, this pandemic really underscores
[Amit Varma]: the importance of local self governance, because the conditions on the ground are so different
[Amit Varma]: from neighborhood to neighborhood, that any central response, which looks at a one size
[Amit Varma]: fits all sort of approach will necessarily fail. So one that do you think that this underscores
[Amit Varma]: a need for greater local self governance? And do you think that there is state capacity
[Amit Varma]: for such local self governance to actually work?
[Guest]: So it is, of course, a story about empowering local self governance, but it's also a story
[Guest]: of getting a polycentric governance system to work. So when I'm talking about a polycentric
[Guest]: system, I'm talking about multiple tiers of government, and whose functions and responsibilities
[Guest]: are demarcated, or basically the jurisdiction is demarcated in such a way that they can
[Guest]: absorb any externalities. So and they're able to, you know, function at the right level
[Guest]: of scale. So for instance, when we're talking about a, you know, an outbreak, there's multiple
[Guest]: things going on, you need at the local level, you need empowerment, but you also need some
[Guest]: higher level some thinking about, you know, the scale, I mean, the scale of thinking has
[Guest]: to be slightly higher, where you are thinking about, you know, things like, what should
[Guest]: be the testing strategies, and what should be the, the way in which you are deploying
[Guest]: your resources. So state resources, because not all resources may be with the with the
[Guest]: local body. And the reason why if, I mean, it makes sense to have them at the state,
[Guest]: if the state is at the appropriate scale to be able to absorb the externalities that come
[Guest]: up. So it's the fact that you need the polycentric system to work. So you need your local tire
[Guest]: to work, you need your say, metropolitan tire, a level of government or metropolitan system
[Guest]: to work, and you need your state system to work. And they're all doing different things.
[Guest]: This polycentric governance actually was a term that was coined by Vincent and Eleanor
[Guest]: Rostrom. And when they were looking at police, you know, the way police function in in the
[Guest]: United States, and basically, why do you have sort of different tiers? And why should you
[Guest]: either not, you know, it's a disaster, if you either consolidate everything, or you
[Guest]: completely decentralize everything, because there are functions that you need different
[Guest]: to to be assigned to different scales. So I know this was a bit of a digression, but
[Guest]: I just wanted to highlight that we end up talking a lot about decentralization, because
[Guest]: we know that that piece, I mean, at that level, things are completely broken, at least at
[Guest]: the state level, some things work. But at this at the urban sort of city level, we are
[Guest]: not giving cities enough revenues. The property tax collections are, like very, very minuscule.
[Guest]: And cities like Mumbai earlier used to rely on octroi. And octroi went away because of
[Guest]: the GST. So there's a massive shortfall, which has not been offset by any other revenue source.
[Guest]: So there's a major following out of the revenues that cities have, if you don't have revenues,
[Guest]: then then you don't have the power to undertake any sort of expenditures that can allow you
[Guest]: to run at excess capacity, right? Because then everything is a is an exercise in saving
[Guest]: budgets and saving expenditures. So that's the sort of problem that you have, when you
[Guest]: don't have revenues at the city level. The second issue is, and I think this has been
[Guest]: discussed earlier also, is you don't have leadership, you don't have accountable leadership,
[Guest]: because the mayors don't have any real powers. And the municipal commissioners are sort of
[Guest]: appointed by state governments, and they can their political masters at the state level.
[Guest]: This is not to say that municipal commissioners have no incentive in ensuring the corporation's
[Guest]: performed well. But it becomes too idiosyncratic, depending on the person that you have. And,
[Guest]: you know, if you're lucky enough to have a great bureaucrat, then then it's good. But
[Guest]: if he it's if he or she is bad, you can vote them out of power the next time, or take any
[Guest]: action against them. If you had a system where the commissioner was accountable to the mayor,
[Guest]: at least through the mayor, you could exercise some control over the actions of the commissioners,
[Guest]: because the mayors are powerless. So that's basically your revenues are a mess, you don't
[Guest]: have enough decentralized power. And the third thing that's missing is, you know, in terms
[Guest]: of your functions and responsibilities that you have to undertake, there is a list which
[Guest]: is called wealth taboo lists out the functions that an urban local body has to undertake.
[Guest]: But the actual functions of the local body undertakes end up being far more. So whenever
[Guest]: there is a centrally sponsored scheme, which the local bodies then have to undertake, those
[Guest]: are additional unfunded mandates on the local body, which are a drain on the resources which
[Guest]: are not coming on time, even things like your, your grants that the State Finance Commission
[Guest]: has to give the local bodies, the untied grants don't always come through. So there's a whole
[Guest]: bunch of these issues, which are I mean, lot more far experienced people have talked about
[Guest]: it for far longer than even I've been a student or a researcher. So these things have been
[Guest]: happening. I think since the 90s, even if even when we officially sort of recognize
[Guest]: the thought tire at the level of government, in 92, and in 93, the problems have just sort
[Guest]: of refused to go away. And there's a difference across states, some states to better some
[Guest]: states to worse. But the, the these, I mean, if I have to look at what can be done, or
[Guest]: what should be done in order to actually solve the problem, it seems like it, it needs to,
[Guest]: I mean, there needs to be something that overrides the states, and maybe, and again, I hesitate
[Guest]: to say this, because I know, like, even the central government is not the best way to
[Guest]: sort of get around to doing things. But if the central government mandates certain things
[Guest]: to, you know, in terms of the fixing the revenues and fixing the system of transferring grants,
[Guest]: I think that would be a useful way to at least address the revenue situation within cities.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you're finding many of them not receiving what they are due. And that's like
[Guest]: millions of grants from the state finance commission, and from the center not being
[Guest]: paid to them. So it's all a question of where the money is. And a question of and while
[Guest]: the while the, the democratic representation and the, you know, the local empowerment and
[Guest]: so on are key, I think the the revenue side of it is we don't hear about a lot in the
[Guest]: public sphere, just maybe because it's sort of a dry topic to talk about, you know, like,
[Guest]: it seems like, what is a grant in aid versus what is a tax and non tax revenue of a government
[Guest]: is not the most exciting thing, I guess, a lay reader wants to look, look at and think
[Guest]: that, but I think, I think that's a very, very critical issue in solving this problem.
[Amit Varma]: I think some dry topics are enough to make the eyes wet. And it's a little sort of bizarre
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, our Prime Minister was actually a chief minister for almost a decade and a
[Amit Varma]: half before he came to power. So you'd imagine that he'd be cognizant and more concerned
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, this aspect of it. And this is also incredibly tragic that I think we
[Amit Varma]: have no option but to take a tangent for a moment or two to turn our mind away to something
[Amit Varma]: else. So I'm not sure that that is less tragic. So while you were speaking of, you know, Bombay
[Amit Varma]: situation with octroi that because of GST octroi revenues have completely gone because
[Amit Varma]: the tax taxation system changed and there's nothing in its place, you know, a thought
[Amit Varma]: that I've sometimes had came to mind. Now, the conventional view of the GST is that look,
[Amit Varma]: it's, it's great in concept, because it takes away all the friction of all these multiple
[Amit Varma]: taxes. And it was incredibly badly sort of implemented, which is why it turned out to
[Amit Varma]: be such a disaster. In fact, I've received some valid criticism that I agree with that
[Amit Varma]: in my episode with Arvind Subramaniam, I didn't push back hard enough on this, because there
[Amit Varma]: is really nothing redeeming about the GST at all. But the other thought that I've had
[Amit Varma]: is that even at a conceptual level, what kind of baffles me is that we keep saying local
[Amit Varma]: self governance, local autonomy, and so on. But the GST is a centralizing, the GST comes
[Amit Varma]: from a centralizing impulse, that what you should do is you should let different taxes
[Amit Varma]: stack different states and different local authorities tax as they will, and then you
[Amit Varma]: let the people decide and you let them kind of compete with each other. So it seems like
[Amit Varma]: even at the level of concept, it's not that it's everything is good about it is that there
[Amit Varma]: is this inherent trade off that you're moving to something centralizing and you're reducing
[Amit Varma]: the autonomy of the states, which is something we actually see playing out, you know, as
[Amit Varma]: we speak in terms of real term consequences. You have any thoughts on this?
[Guest]: My sense is that so even if GST existed, and Octroi did not, a well functioning GST regime
[Guest]: would have, I mean, I am not very anti the idea of GST. And I'm not saying that Octroi
[Guest]: going away was like a complete like, unmitigated disaster. I'm just saying that this points
[Guest]: to the lack of revenue sources that that corporations have and the one revenue source and this is
[Guest]: justified in all types of theoretical frameworks as well. The one revenue source that all local
[Guest]: bodies should have is property tax. And that's the revenue that they are supposed to really
[Guest]: leverage and use. And that's something that we see governments not being able to do because
[Guest]: there is not enough capacity to like, local body capacity to implement a robust property
[Guest]: tax regime. We don't see our property tax systems being, you know, linked properly in
[Guest]: terms of the underlying valuation of the property. We don't see them being buoyant. The rates,
[Guest]: sometimes the rates are too low, even if the rates are not low enough, like people are
[Guest]: simply not paying and you don't have any way of tracking those who do and making them pay.
[Guest]: So my sense is that there's still there's so much work to do in terms of improving our
[Guest]: property tax system alone. Getting that right would be, you know, a major win for urban
[Guest]: local bodies. And the other set of sources that cities have, and this is, I mean, not
[Guest]: perhaps it's not correct to say that cities have it because land is a state subject, but
[Guest]: cities also have, you know, very, very high valued land being used very inefficiently.
[Guest]: And there is government property that is being, or government land that is like vacant. And
[Guest]: these sort of properties and inefficiently used land are a major, can be leveraged to
[Guest]: raise a lot of money for cities. Especially if you, you know, walk around in Mumbai and
[Guest]: see an empty plot of land, you know, how expensive that could be. And just because your government,
[Guest]: you're saying you don't have any incentive to use it or to lease it out to, you know,
[Guest]: the highest bidder and so on. My hope was that with Octroi being taken away, there would
[Guest]: be a lot more dynamism being shown and using these land-based revenue sources more intelligently.
[Guest]: But that again, has not happened at as much of an extent as I would have hoped. So the
[Guest]: property tax and the land-based revenue systems together would have at least, you know, get
[Guest]: help. Cities have a very decent base of revenues and that would have then, you know, allowed
[Guest]: them to do other like more sophisticated things like municipal bonds and, you know, raise
[Guest]: money from the market to finance infrastructure and so on. But yeah, that's, that's not happened.
[Guest]: Again, I mean, I won't be able to articulate why it's not happened, but it certainly hasn't
[Guest]: happened.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. In fact, I had an episode with Rajesh Jain, which we'll also link from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes and you must be familiar with sort of his grand campaign of, you know, he estimated
[Amit Varma]: how much land the state holds across the country, including in Mumbai. And these are not trivial
[Amit Varma]: amounts of land. These are such huge amounts of land that if you actually figure out ways
[Amit Varma]: to monetize them properly, according to Rajesh, you could actually afford to give a UBI to
[Amit Varma]: the whole country just from that alone. So we'll link that episode from the show notes
[Amit Varma]: and leave it to listeners to judge for themselves. You know, having spoken about the state, it's
[Amit Varma]: time now to get back to the more cheerful subject of the pandemic, which actually takes
[Amit Varma]: us back to the state because a third of the things that you and Ruben suggested were quote,
[Amit Varma]: Rural protection systems need to be redesigned to protect the poor and vulnerable in urban
[Amit Varma]: areas, comma, in addition to the current focus on rural settlements, stop quote. Now, whatever
[Amit Varma]: I'm familiar with happening in sort of urban areas has actually happened because of private
[Amit Varma]: initiative, like people give a bad rap to markets and so on. But everything that has
[Amit Varma]: been done for the suffering here is through voluntary action. I think my friend Ruben
[Amit Varma]: Mascarenas and you know, his friends fed 10s of 1000s if not 100s of 1000s of people during
[Amit Varma]: that difficult period of COVID and one could see the government doing absolutely nothing,
[Amit Varma]: at least relatively so. So tell me a bit about what you mean by social protection systems
[Amit Varma]: for urban areas? What would it entail? You know, what are the incentives against just
[Guest]: implementing those and and so on? So social protection systems would fall into a bunch
[Guest]: of different categories. So there will be things like livelihood protection. There's
[Guest]: things like livelihood support, where you provide income support, there's access to
[Guest]: so your public distribution system, which is your ration, shops and so on. They form
[Guest]: a part of the social protection systems. You also have schemes targeted to certain types
[Guest]: of population, like the elderly, the ones or women, and so on. So all of these are your
[Guest]: sort of, you know, all the schemes under which a poor person or a poor household can avail
[Guest]: some benefits or the other for different reasons. So their food needs can food security needs
[Guest]: are taken care of through PDF. And then, you know, livelihood needs, maybe they are not
[Guest]: livelihood needs, but some kind of income support may be provided through these pensions,
[Guest]: social pensions that the government provides. And if you have a potential livelihood shock,
[Guest]: in terms of unemployment, you have your employment guarantee schemes that work. Now, all of them
[Guest]: are designed for a rural population and a rural country. As I mentioned earlier, right,
[Guest]: your your NREGA is is a rural scheme. So if you're an urban household facing a temporary
[Guest]: employment shock, there's no employment guarantee scheme for you. PDS, because it's linked to
[Guest]: and again, to be fair, there's a lot of now a lot of churn and a lot of rethinking of
[Guest]: these systems. PDS, again, is linked to the ration card, which is the place you stay.
[Guest]: So if you're a migrant, you cannot avail PDS. Because if your address is somewhere outside
[Guest]: of the state, you cannot go to a ration shop and ask for ration. So there's just all these
[Guest]: barriers to, you know, and, again, the barriers may have come out of just the way the architecture
[Guest]: of the system is where you have, because the states are responsible for providing most
[Guest]: of and implementing most of the social protection schemes. They just end up sort of being very,
[Guest]: very different across and you end up then asking for a proof all the time of, you know,
[Guest]: you belonging to the state to be able to avail these benefits. So these kinds of issues have
[Guest]: in the pandemic time really, really hurt the poor. And there is an opportunity here to
[Guest]: think more creatively. Again, given you now have some technology, you have your, you know,
[Guest]: Jan Dhan accounts, and you have some sort of a mobile technology in which you're able
[Guest]: to reach people. There is a way to try and be link, say, PDS from where the person originally
[Guest]: lives in. There's a way to try and think about an urban employment guarantee scheme. There's
[Guest]: a way to try and think about housing for migrant workers in terms of currently I mean, of course,
[Guest]: most of them live in cheap rental accommodation in slums and so on. But there's also such
[Guest]: a massive gap in what we know, like collecting information about, you know, how do migrant
[Guest]: workers actually go about surviving in the city? Like, how do they even access anything
[Guest]: from like a bag to a ration to, you know, housing, creating that database of knowledge,
[Guest]: in order to inform your policy design, that's important. That's an activity that needs to
[Guest]: be taken up again, not necessarily always by the government, it could be philanthropy
[Guest]: organizations, it could be NGOs, it could be a partnership, a consortium of these different
[Guest]: organizations coming together to do this. But that I mean, building that knowledge base
[Guest]: is also equally important. So, I would think that A, the knowledge creation and collecting
[Guest]: information and B, redesigning or thinking about redesigning your employment schemes,
[Guest]: your PDS schemes, and even your other say, social pension schemes, in order to actually
[Guest]: benefit the, you know, the most vulnerable people and reach them is critical. And I think
[Guest]: that those conversations are happening. And I'm a little more optimistic about that end
[Guest]: of things that I think things may, I mean, we may end up making some interesting policy
[Guest]: reforms that hopefully will have much needed and long lasting impact.
[Amit Varma]: So I have two questions here. And I'll ask them separately, because one feedback I've
[Amit Varma]: also got is when I ask a two part question, guests get confused and answer only the second
[Amit Varma]: part because my questions go on for so long. So I'm going to ask these parts separately.
[Amit Varma]: And part one is that it strikes me that in all of this, there are inherent issues with
[Amit Varma]: how difficult these are to implement. For example, there's just a question of identifying
[Amit Varma]: who should be a recipient or whatever, you know, if you say that, okay, we are going
[Amit Varma]: to give some cover for sudden unemployment because of pandemic. But when so much of your
[Amit Varma]: economy is an informal sector, how do you even identify and classify unemployment when
[Amit Varma]: you haven't recognized the employment to begin with? And you know, there are so many leakage
[Amit Varma]: is within the system. So the question here is that, given all of these, assuming that
[Amit Varma]: you get the government and power to agree with you that these are the things that need
[Amit Varma]: to be done on a scale of one to 10, how likely is it that state capacity will actually be
[Amit Varma]: up to the task of implementing these?
[Guest]: That's I don't know how to how to sort of...
[Amit Varma]: I just realized I might have put you on a spot because if people in government are listening
[Amit Varma]: to this, they'll be like...
[Guest]: I mean, that's not the issue at all. I'm just trying to think about how does one quantify
[Guest]: these kinds of things at the end of the day isn't any scale like an arbitrary thing. But
[Guest]: from a qualitative perspective of like really badly equipped to like they'll do a great
[Guest]: job of implementing it. It will depend on what we end up designing. And again, I may
[Guest]: be a little more hopeful because just because there seems to be enough A, like smart people
[Guest]: working on this problem and people who had very, very deep experience looking and engaging
[Guest]: with state governments who are sort of thinking through these problems, not like some fly
[Guest]: by night operators being brought in to solve the problem. If it is designed well, and if
[Guest]: you're using the technology that you have responsibly and in order to actually benefit
[Guest]: the people in terms of ensuring that you're identifying them while all the protection
[Guest]: mechanisms are in place. I think I'm more optimistic about this. I feel that we would
[Guest]: be able to do something. So I would say maybe in seven out of 10. I did end up giving a
[Amit Varma]: number.
[Amit Varma]: No, I think it's, you know, even if no one is going to hold you to a number, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: because social science is so inexact in these ways. But I find just asking people about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, on the scale forces them to sort of think a little harder about it. And the
[Amit Varma]: exercise of coming up with a number is fun. My instinct would be actually I mean, it's
[Amit Varma]: the question is phrased wrongly. I mean, what are the chances that whatever your design
[Amit Varma]: gets implemented, I would say it's obviously zero because they can't implement it all.
[Amit Varma]: But how much of it is likely to get implemented on a scale of zero to 10? I don't know. I
[Amit Varma]: mean, seven seems to me to be on the high side of the of my range. But if I had to give
[Amit Varma]: it a range, yeah, maybe like two to seven, which is a way.
[Guest]: I think I would rather be a little more generous. And then I, you know, of course, can correct
[Guest]: myself later. And we can have a follow up conversation. You can ask me again.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, you know, I prefer your approach, because the point is that if you thought it
[Amit Varma]: was less than seven, you might think that it is not worthwhile my doing any work here.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, I would be perfectly happy if you thought it was 10. I would not argue
[Amit Varma]: with you there. Because, you know, we need people like you more than we need people like
[Amit Varma]: me to make change sort of happen. My second question is this, that it's obvious that there,
[Amit Varma]: you know, needs to be disaster mitigation, that, you know, when a crisis strikes, you
[Amit Varma]: need to find ways to give relief to the people whatever form that takes. Now, there are sort
[Amit Varma]: of two philosophical questions that come up there. Somebody could easily pop up and say
[Amit Varma]: that, boss, I lost my job because of COVID. So you're giving me compensation. But if I
[Amit Varma]: lose my job at any other time, for any other reason, like say demonetization, which was
[Amit Varma]: not a natural disaster, but a manmade disaster, then why am I not due compensation? Why are
[Amit Varma]: you recognizing one kind of suffering than another, which becomes a philosophical question.
[Amit Varma]: And the other issue that then comes up is about the dangers of potentially building
[Amit Varma]: patronage systems, which then never get dismantled. And therefore, that sort of becomes a trap
[Amit Varma]: because the moment you build any kind of entitlement into the system, look, the political economy
[Amit Varma]: is such that it's simply never going to go away. And while it is good at that short term
[Amit Varma]: moment, again, the pandemic paradox that there is a disaster and people can't eat, so you
[Amit Varma]: obviously have to do something about it. But if you set it in stone, then the opportunity
[Amit Varma]: cost of that is a long term reforms and the building the long term structures that would
[Amit Varma]: help the whole nation right to prosperity in the long run so that these mitigating measures
[Amit Varma]: are not needed at all or not needed the next time. So how does one sort of deal with this?
[Amit Varma]: Because one thing that does seem to be happening, you know, is that during pandemics like this
[Amit Varma]: or during times of crisis, the state just expands, and then it doesn't contract back
[Amit Varma]: to where it was. And a lot of this expansion is not necessarily expansion in the good sense
[Amit Varma]: that we would want that it's doing the duties that it should and getting stronger in that
[Amit Varma]: regard, but is sort of all these other things. So what are your thoughts on this? Is this
[Amit Varma]: a danger that you kind of grapple with?
[Guest]: So about the question of, okay, why are we offering SOPs in one case? And why not the
[Guest]: other? Why a national disaster? Why not a man-made disaster? The point is that you have
[Guest]: a large section of population that has been completely devastated, right? And there's
[Guest]: so many, so many, so many examples and stories and news articles and so on. I mean, what
[Guest]: is, I mean, I'm sorry if I'm being a bit wishy-washy, but what is the morally right thing to do
[Guest]: for the government or for the state? And if the state should not, ought not to do this,
[Guest]: then you know, which is protect its most vulnerable citizens or try and in whatever way, given
[Guest]: whatever implementation constraints and so on, should it not attempt to alleviate some
[Guest]: of these problems and some of these shocks that people have had. And where I come on
[Guest]: the side is that the state must do something about it. To your second point about whether
[Guest]: or not it ends up being just something that will never go away and just an entitlement
[Guest]: and so on. If we take the case of what the developed countries are doing, they're also
[Guest]: offering these COVID-related measures and so on. We are also offering the COVID-related
[Guest]: schemes. We are also at the same time trying to build a system or rebuild a social protection
[Guest]: architecture from some sort of different principles, right? So where earlier you were just like,
[Guest]: you know, saying, okay, whoever, let's focus on rural areas and let's, it's incumbent on
[Guest]: the citizen to be able to fulfill 50 criteria to be able to get this. Now we're like, let's
[Guest]: tolerate some inclusion errors. It's okay if people who don't need to get it end up
[Guest]: getting it. A, the reason is that you're, I don't think that it, so here's the thing.
[Guest]: So if you provide a system where you are giving a larger number of people, you're expanding
[Guest]: the net and then, you know, whoever gets in, gets in. If you have some self-selecting mechanisms,
[Guest]: you may find people opting out because I mean, frankly, what will I do with a pension of
[Guest]: 500 rupees per month, I mean, per month for the rest of my life. And if I, you know, if
[Guest]: I don't need it, I can, I'm happy to give it away. The point is that if you expand the
[Guest]: net enough, you may have some inclusion errors, but it's fine because it's better to do that
[Guest]: rather than to exclude the people who actually need it. And that is a, that is a bigger problem.
[Guest]: And as you sort of, I don't know if there's been any rigorous study that looks at whether
[Guest]: or not, if once you have a social protection scheme, do people end up, you know, using
[Guest]: that as a crutch and, and therefore not end up striving to aspire to improve their livelihoods.
[Guest]: I don't see this as a very, it's, you know, mutually exclusive thing that if you have
[Guest]: this, then I have no incentives, perhaps the safety nets are so low that you would, you're
[Guest]: much better off in the long run, if you want, if you try and get out of this dependency
[Guest]: on the social safety systems or the social protection schemes. So if that ends up happening,
[Guest]: and I'm more optimistic in the sense that I do feel people want to see their lives get
[Guest]: better and their children's life getting better. And they know that if relying on those is
[Guest]: not the way that's going to happen, they will also want to strive to, you know, get higher
[Guest]: incomes and move out of this. And so you will end up, you may still have the architecture
[Guest]: in place, you may have more people coming in as, as other people move out of it. In
[Guest]: that sense, it will remain entrenched. But I don't think that, you know, for the same
[Guest]: set of beneficiaries, they end up being dependent on it for all their lives. I think it's more
[Guest]: of people move out, and then more people come in.
[Amit Varma]: So let me let me sort of, as I was thinking aloud, let me continue thinking aloud and
[Amit Varma]: kind of clarify what I meant. What I meant was not that patronage is necessarily a bad
[Amit Varma]: thing in all contexts. In fact, on the contrary, I agree with you that it is our moral responsibility
[Amit Varma]: to alleviate the sort of pain and the suffering that is out there. But I would add to that
[Amit Varma]: and say that much as we think of COVID-19 as a disaster, it's also a fact that we are
[Amit Varma]: in the middle of an ongoing disaster, which has lasted 73 years and is caused by the Indian
[Amit Varma]: state. I wrote a column about this, which I linked from the show notes. But look, here's
[Amit Varma]: the thing. Every day 3000 children die in India of starvation. That's almost 100,000
[Amit Varma]: kids in India dying of starvation every month. Right? And to me, that's a disaster. And we
[Amit Varma]: need to do something about that. But it's normalized. And of course, those deaths are
[Amit Varma]: dispersed and those deaths are invisible to us because they're probably happening in areas
[Amit Varma]: where the media doesn't go and cover all of that. So we can ignore that. And so my broader
[Amit Varma]: point of what the state should do about what is happening, for example, if 3000 kids are
[Amit Varma]: dying every day of starvation, what do you do about that? And my broader point is that
[Amit Varma]: you need a two prong strategy, which I think most people would agree with, which is that
[Amit Varma]: in the short term, you feed them, you figure out a way to get food to them, get money to
[Amit Varma]: them, and you sort out the problem with short term patronage. And you have to do that. It's
[Amit Varma]: your moral responsibility to do that. But at the same time, you put in place long term
[Amit Varma]: structures by which they can at some point in time feed themselves. And therefore, you
[Amit Varma]: don't need to, for example, to use your the example of the figure that you named, you
[Amit Varma]: don't need to give 500 bucks a month to anybody after a period of time, because everybody
[Amit Varma]: is earning so much more that they don't really care for that. That's your long term goal.
[Amit Varma]: I think what often happens in India is that we look for the short term fixes. And then
[Amit Varma]: we'll say ki hume jo karna tha humne kar diya and now we don't need to do anything else.
[Amit Varma]: For example, when it comes to something like the agricultural crisis, we see this, where
[Amit Varma]: now it's almost become a fait accompli that everyone has to promise farm loan waivers,
[Amit Varma]: which is often a necessary anaesthetic in a short term sense, but you never end up making
[Amit Varma]: the long term reforms that you actually need to, to solve the problem. Because one, those
[Amit Varma]: incentives aren't there, those solutions are not in demand, because they're unintuitive
[Amit Varma]: very often for most people, a politician's time horizon extends to the next election.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, some reforms could take 1015 years to play out. So yeah, I'm not disputing
[Amit Varma]: anything you're saying. And I'm just kind of clarifying where I was coming from. There's
[Amit Varma]: no question at the end of this. But I'll, I'll, since we are talking about the state,
[Amit Varma]: I will get to a question that I did have, which is the writer jack shanker and a piece
[Amit Varma]: in the Guardian, you know, wrote a piece on cities post COVID, where I found this paragraph
[Amit Varma]: quite fascinating, very right score. South Korea, one of the countries worst affected
[Amit Varma]: by the disease has also posted some of the lowest mortality rates and achievement that
[Amit Varma]: can be traced in part to a series of technological innovations, including controversially, the
[Amit Varma]: mapping and publication of infected patients movement. And, you know, so this kind of strikes
[Amit Varma]: me as another, an interesting example, of course, of the trade off between security
[Amit Varma]: and privacy, in this case, security against the virus. But also, then a pandemic like
[Amit Varma]: this can become an excuse for a for creeping authoritarianism, where, you know, and you
[Amit Varma]: yourself have referred earlier in this podcast to surveillance in positive terms, that it's
[Amit Varma]: something that helps you control the disease. So how are we to what are we to make this
[Amit Varma]: trade off, especially when we live in times that there are worries about such authoritarianism
[Amit Varma]: and about the state getting too much power over the lives of people? So how does one
[Amit Varma]: think about this at a conceptual level? And then at a political economy level? How does
[Amit Varma]: one sort of negotiate this because the impulse of the state will always be to, you know,
[Guest]: get as much control as they can? So it's great you asked that, because that's my real worry.
[Guest]: It's not so much the fact that if you have a patronage system in place, it just won't
[Guest]: go away. My worry is that if you have a surveillance system in place, it will just try and, you
[Guest]: know, dig its claws deeper and just not go away. And that's a very, very real fear, even
[Guest]: in a democratic society, like India, because we still have so many draconian laws from
[Guest]: the colonial times that have, you know, continued and that have been used time and again by
[Guest]: the state as a means to, to thwart dissent, to get people to stop criticizing or stop
[Guest]: being critical and of your private information through say, mobile phone apps and the like
[Guest]: being collected by the state is extremely worrying. And I'm not a privacy expert or
[Guest]: a data governance expert. So in terms of thinking through solutions, I will not know how we
[Guest]: can think of safeguarding people's privacy, like what steps should people take? My other
[Guest]: concern is also that we don't have enough political leaders who can stand up or like
[Guest]: talk about this as an issue and actually be an effective that sort of checks and balance
[Guest]: in the legislature is, is not no longer there. And so, I mean, I'm very, very concerned and
[Guest]: very, very pessimistic about this about and very cynical about the fact that you are developing
[Guest]: systems in which you are giving more and more power to the state, and it's going to end
[Guest]: up having some unhealthy consequences in terms of what can be done to assure this. I mean,
[Guest]: to mitigate this or whether or not there was another way to go about doing this without
[Guest]: giving the state so much power, what would the other alternatives that we could have
[Guest]: taken up? I'm not sure that I have the answers to that question either. But it is, if you
[Guest]: look at what other state, I mean, not South Korea, but say, if you look at what Europe
[Guest]: does, and the Europeans are massively concerned about privacy, right, and individual right
[Guest]: to privacy and so on. Perhaps there are models there that could have been used. But I think
[Guest]: that that ship has sailed. I mean, we've already ended up doing a lot of things that were unnecessary,
[Guest]: that were intrusive. So, yeah, I mean, I don't know if I mean, that is all the supposedly
[Guest]: the courts that that need that will protect the individual from any kind of state overreach.
[Guest]: But I mean, I think, I think I'm not very optimistic about that, as well. So yeah, it's
[Amit Varma]: all bad news. I'm glad you said supposedly when you said it supposedly the courts that
[Amit Varma]: will protect us know we are recording this on September 9. And, you know, the way the
[Amit Varma]: media hounded Rhea Chakravorty, and she eventually got arrested for drugs possession and cannabis
[Amit Varma]: shouldn't even be illegal, but she got arrested for that, even though no actual drugs were
[Amit Varma]: recovered from her. It was I think, on the basis of WhatsApp messages or something where
[Amit Varma]: she was, you know, getting something for Sushant Singh Rajput to smoke. So it's kind of ridiculous.
[Amit Varma]: I'm also reminded of how, you know, the government released the tea star settle words credit
[Amit Varma]: card record wants to show that she brought alcohol from a store. I mean, what freaking
[Amit Varma]: business is that of anyone? So the thing here is, even if we had a proper laws protecting
[Amit Varma]: us the way the state is, and how, you know, it's also dysfunctional, it probably won't
[Amit Varma]: even matter. Let's let's kind of go back to the fourth of the suggestions that you and
[Amit Varma]: Ruben made. And I also want to explore one aspect of this bit where you said, quote,
[Amit Varma]: countries such as India with large out of pocket expenditures in private health care
[Amit Varma]: must restore the balance between health care and robust public health that focuses on improving
[Amit Varma]: health outcomes for all only a capable state can deliver the latter. And what I'd like
[Amit Varma]: to ask you about and elaborate on because I think this is a subject that confuses a
[Amit Varma]: lot of people is the difference between health care and public health, that sometimes when
[Amit Varma]: you talk about, you know, public health, people assume that, oh, this means that the state
[Amit Varma]: will pay everybody's medical expenses, which is their health care expenses, which is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, not the case, it means something entirely different, it means not necessarily treating
[Amit Varma]: diseases, but preventing them from arising in the first place. So can you talk a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about firstly, this distinction? And secondly, what can the state now do to sort of make
[Amit Varma]: sure that whenever such a pandemic next occurs, its effects are relatively mitigated?
[Guest]: So you're right. So we're talking about, you know, prevention of communicable diseases,
[Guest]: prevention of infectious diseases, and everything that that can be done to prevent that, including
[Guest]: say fumigating your streets to like making sure there's no saturated water that can be
[Guest]: polluted, breeding sites for mosquitoes to ensuring that clean water available for citizens
[Guest]: to drink, and you know, there's no chances of contamination, and also ensuring that your
[Guest]: sanitation systems are not, you know, leaking into your water pipe systems. All of these
[Guest]: things are unhealthy. I mean, the reason why they should exist is to have a healthier population
[Guest]: and a healthier citizenry. So that, you know, a healthy population can, you know, be more
[Guest]: productive and the gains are in terms of, again, increased revenues for the state. So
[Guest]: that's the entire justification for having a public health system, not as opposed to
[Guest]: a public health care system, which is taking care of like an individual sort of once there's
[Guest]: a prognosis diagnosis, then helping with the curing and the you know, those other post
[Guest]: illness treatments and so on. That's the major sort of difference. So what we are saying
[Guest]: is that we need to have what do our departments of public health actually have power over
[Guest]: say in a municipal body? Is it just looking after public hospitals? Or is it actually
[Guest]: having a say in terms of, you know, what is your plan for augmenting your water infrastructure?
[Guest]: What is your plan for augmenting your sewerage networks? And this is a point again that I'd
[Guest]: made earlier that it's not this lack of thing. It is generally okay, as fumigation and so
[Guest]: on these other activities may come under public health, but not this idea of infrastructure
[Guest]: investment. And so you need to think about all of these state functions and state services
[Guest]: from as a public health function, and not just a public service function. The second
[Guest]: thing is, I mean, and we obviously caveat it by saying only a capable state can do this,
[Guest]: which should clue you into our inherent cynicism to actually expecting a state that is not
[Guest]: capable, which could be, many of our local governments are not up to the task to be able
[Guest]: to do these things, and for aforementioned reasons of not having any real powers or revenues
[Guest]: to be able to do that. So, A, all the public health needs to be looked at from this angle.
[Guest]: It's very, even after a pandemic, I don't think that until we solve the problem of decentralization,
[Guest]: we can't really expect at the municipal level, things to really change and governance systems
[Guest]: to really change at the municipal level to actually look at it as a integrated thing.
[Guest]: I mean, it would be great if maybe one or two cities tried it. I guess it may be easier
[Guest]: to do and not in a like Bombay or Mumbai megacity, but in a smaller city in a relatively prosperous
[Guest]: state government, maybe that may work. I mean, relatively prosperous state, a smaller city
[Guest]: may be able to do it. But yeah, I think it's necessary, but it's not. I personally don't
[Amit Varma]: see it happening, like anytime soon. Fair enough. Let's kind of move past this narrow
[Amit Varma]: depressing context of what the state can do and all of that and just talk broadly about
[Amit Varma]: cities and COVID in general. Now, what we've seen as we were discussing, you know, trends
[Amit Varma]: of the past, you know, Ed Lazer wrote a great piece on this, which he forwarded to me, which
[Amit Varma]: we'll link from the show notes, that pandemics happen, cities bounce back, that there's an
[Amit Varma]: inherent need for cities and that kind of agglomeration. So, you know, things will continue
[Amit Varma]: as usual. But at the same time, leave the pandemic aside, you know, is there a case
[Amit Varma]: to be made that we need to redefine how we think of cities and how we think of networks
[Amit Varma]: and communities, in the sense that I was reading this excellent paper for Bain & Co by Karen
[Amit Varma]: Harris and a couple of co-authors where I came across this phrase, the cost of distance.
[Amit Varma]: And her point, of course, is that the reason cities come together is because of the cost
[Amit Varma]: of distance, because distance is expensive. It is hard to communicate and to send goods
[Amit Varma]: and services across too much space. So therefore, you need to all conglomerate together in close
[Amit Varma]: distances and that's why cities are there. But the trend that has been happening over
[Amit Varma]: the last couple of decades is that the cost of distance is reducing massively. For example,
[Amit Varma]: think about messages, or you can send an email to anyone anywhere in the world and it, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you're not actually sending a letter where the cost of transporting a physical
[Amit Varma]: letter, you know, gets the rises with the distance covered, you are reaching a stage
[Amit Varma]: where you will have, say, delivery drones, where you will have eventually self driven
[Amit Varma]: cars and trucks and all of that. So the cost of distance is reducing massively. And what
[Amit Varma]: these lockdowns, you know, imposed because of COVID-19 have also taught us, it's a cliche
[Amit Varma]: to say that we'll be working from home forever, I sincerely hope not. But what they've also
[Amit Varma]: shown is that it is possible for a lot of people to work from a distance, that what
[Amit Varma]: we really miss is not so much in terms of efficiency, but what at least, you know, I
[Amit Varma]: of course, don't work for a company. So I, you know, I don't have personal experience
[Amit Varma]: with that aspect of it, what I miss is just going out and physically meeting friends.
[Amit Varma]: And that can, you know, change any way with time. But it seems to me that in many different
[Amit Varma]: ways, therefore, as we redefine our communities, and we redefine who our neighbors are, because
[Amit Varma]: I think the whole concept of who your neighbor is, is not necessarily only a geographical
[Amit Varma]: concept that, you know, when we'd spoken about doing this episode three months ago, we'd
[Amit Varma]: said that, you know, let the lockdown end and we are in Mumbai, we'll meet up at a studio
[Amit Varma]: and do it. But now we've decided to play it safe. And we are doing it remotely, like I
[Amit Varma]: record with my guests from all over the world. So that space doesn't matter, the distance
[Amit Varma]: doesn't matter, it no longer matters so much that we are in the same city. In fact, you
[Amit Varma]: know, up to a couple of years ago, I thought I can live in any city, it doesn't really
[Amit Varma]: matter to me. And then I realized when the podcast took off that I have to be in Mumbai,
[Amit Varma]: because I have access to a studio and I have access to some guests. So I have to be in
[Amit Varma]: a big city. And now with this pandemic, I'm realizing that, hey, even that's actually
[Amit Varma]: not really true. All I need is a great internet connection. And I'm sorted. You know, everything
[Amit Varma]: else is remote. So there are these, sorry, if I feel like I'm rambling, but there are
[Amit Varma]: these sort of two questions. One, that do you think that at a conceptual level, the
[Amit Varma]: notion of a city and the notion of why it's necessary was going to change anyway, as time
[Amit Varma]: progressed? And if so, do you feel that might have been accelerated by it coming into such
[Amit Varma]: sharp and concrete focus because of the pandemic?
[Guest]: To a certain extent, this is a lot more relevant to a developed country context. And to, you
[Guest]: know, even in India, certain section of the population, right, who can sit at home and
[Guest]: have a stable enough internet connection, although I can't claim that mine is stable
[Guest]: at all. But there's even, okay, so taking care of like, let's say those constraints
[Guest]: are taken care of, right? Everyone gets that great access to great internet. And, you know,
[Guest]: so there's no problems of neat, you know, information technology, or all these things
[Guest]: are taken care of. Why would you still want to be in a city? I think it is, in a sense,
[Guest]: there is an idea of wanting to be able to do some things that cities can afford you
[Guest]: to do that other things can't, you can't. So for instance, going to the, again, not
[Guest]: not very relevant in other cases, but in Mumbai, you can enjoy a nice, like classical concert,
[Guest]: you know, and the at the NCP and then the next day, you know, go to another film, sort
[Guest]: of club and watch a lovely film and do all these other things which are possible, because
[Guest]: these do arts and your culture needs some densities to be able to survive. And that's
[Guest]: what cities afford. So it's not it, of course, it's your livelihoods that matter. And I bring
[Guest]: you here in the first place. But what matters to you is also sort of something like going
[Guest]: and watching a great movie at a film festival and going and watching a nice, you know, opera
[Guest]: somewhere. And those things are not something that I don't think the cost of distance argument
[Guest]: applies. And I still I think there are enough people that want to be able to sort of have
[Guest]: Thai food one day and then have like, order in some Chinese the next day and, you know,
[Guest]: enjoy some good food again. And, and these, these kinds of places will only thrive with
[Guest]: this certain number of clientele there. So, in a sense, there is value to the city for
[Guest]: all these other pleasures that it affords, for which will not be addressed by this thing
[Guest]: of cost of distance going away. So you, you know, you can, of course, watch some concert
[Guest]: online and rent a movie online. But I, I mean, I don't, I think I'll be, it'll be safe to
[Guest]: say that it's not the same thing as watching a live performance. The other reason why cities
[Guest]: are important is also the anonymity and the social mobility that they afford certain sections
[Guest]: of people. If you are stuck in a rural farm somewhere with this, you know, same kind of
[Guest]: oppressive systems around you, and you happen to be somebody who's not from, you know, one
[Guest]: of the socially privileged communities over there, then, then moving to cities will afford
[Guest]: you a level of anonymity, they'll afford you an opportunity for social mobility, which
[Guest]: again, it's not something that, it's not a cost of distance problem per se. So I still
[Guest]: think that as much as we think that cities are, you know, likely going to be redundant
[Guest]: or you don't need cities around anymore, we undervalue the, these softer aspects of like
[Guest]: the non-measurable aspect of urban living. And those I feel are not non-trivial. And
[Guest]: they do sort of, you know, they will continue to persist. And that's why, I mean, I'm, I'm
[Guest]: pretty optimistic that we, that cities are not going to go away. I mean, a lot of people
[Guest]: may wish them away, but I don't think that that's going to happen.
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree entirely with you. In fact, you know, I'm, I love cities, you know, whenever
[Amit Varma]: I go on vacations or whatever, I'd rather go to a big city than to some really secluded
[Amit Varma]: nice place on a hill or whatever, because just taking in that new life of a new city
[Amit Varma]: is something I find wonderful. And both your reasons are great. And you know, the second
[Amit Varma]: one that you gave me the social mobility reason, I thought that there, what applies that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, if you're a Dalit stuck in a village with an entrenched and oppressive car system,
[Amit Varma]: then forget the cost of distance, there is a cost to proximity. And you actually want
[Amit Varma]: to put some distance between you and wherever you are. So, you know, that's a great reason.
[Amit Varma]: And your other reason is something that I kind of viscerally feel like my being in Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: the highlight of every year for me, clearly not yours, because I've never seen you there
[Amit Varma]: is a mummy film festival, where I will just make sure that I have that week off and I
[Amit Varma]: watch some 20 green films in those seven days. And it's just totally the highlight for me.
[Amit Varma]: And that's made possible by the fact that there is a city. So there are all these viewers
[Amit Varma]: and all the economies of scale work out. Now, one could argue that, hey, you could just
[Amit Varma]: sit at home and on your big high definitions, screens, recreate the experience. But I guess
[Amit Varma]: that depends on how much you value the social part of the experience. But one thing that
[Amit Varma]: you definitely cannot recreate and that you will not have without cities is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: speciality cuisine restaurants, because, you know, those depend on these large networks
[Amit Varma]: of people to for those, you know, for it to make feasible to serve those little long tails.
[Amit Varma]: So I couldn't agree more with all of this, as I think you've taken enough of your time
[Amit Varma]: and you've been very patient and generous with your insights. I'll leave with a sort
[Amit Varma]: of a question that you must have been expecting, which is that, you know, talking about not
[Amit Varma]: just cities, but your work with cities and the way Indian cities are going and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth, just in that context, over the next 10 years, what gives you hope and what
[Amit Varma]: gives you despair?
[Guest]: What gives me hope is actually this very famous. I don't know if it is actually that famous.
[Guest]: Ellen Barry wrote a piece in New York Times about these girls who had come from Odisha
[Guest]: to work in Bangalore in textile factory and just it was about their lives. And it was
[Guest]: a lovely piece about how, where they went, what they did after work, and how for many
[Guest]: of them, they were tasting freedom for the first time, financial freedom, freedom to
[Guest]: discover and who they are. And that sort of, you know, that it's maybe I'm looking at it
[Guest]: from a very raw instinctive perspective, but it gives me hope that that we are still affording
[Guest]: these kinds of opportunities to people to actually be able to experience independence
[Guest]: and freedom and thinking about what their dreams and aspirations are. And to come to
[Guest]: what gives me despair, it is that, you know, that story was written a few years ago, and
[Guest]: things have changed since then, right? And we're seeing, I mean, the economic situation
[Guest]: is not great. And the pandemic has just completely led to all sorts of breakdowns of economic
[Guest]: systems, social systems, even. And, I mean, as much as I'd like to believe, I'm not, I
[Guest]: think it's going to be a long time coming before we actually get back to those levels
[Guest]: of, you know, growth and prosperity. And that track, going back to that track of growth
[Guest]: and prosperity is going to take us some time. And things can, I mean, things can go wrong
[Guest]: in all kinds of ways. So it's not a given that we get there eventually. And, you know,
[Guest]: it's just a small few years of, but it's those few years are very, very, very costly. And
[Guest]: in terms of what they mean for so many millions of people who are experiencing, you know,
[Guest]: going back under the poverty line, and so on. So that gives me some, some despair.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a lot of despair and some that I share with you. So I shall end on the note
[Amit Varma]: of hope that, you know, this is not the last that I've seen of you on the scene and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen and hopefully the next time we can record in person. Thank you so much for coming
[Guest]: on the show. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do follow Vaidehi on Twitter at Vaidehi Tandil,
[Amit Varma]: one word. You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes
[Amit Varma]: of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and the Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.